DELIFFAS: Deformable Light Fields
for Fast Avatar Synthesis
Youngjoong Kwon1∗,
Lingjie Liu2,3,
Henry Fuchs1,
Marc Habermann3,4†,
Christian Theobalt3,4
1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 2University of Pennsylvania.
3Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus.
4Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI.
{youngjoong,fuchs}@cs.unc.edu
{lliu,mhaberma,theobalt}mpi-inf.mpg.de
Abstract
Generating controllable and photorealistic digital human avatars is a long-standing
and important problem in Vision and Graphics. Recent methods have shown great
progress in terms of either photorealism or inference speed while the combination
of the two desired properties still remains unsolved. To this end, we propose
a novel method, called DELIFFAS, which parameterizes the appearance of the
human as a surface light field that is attached to a controllable and deforming
human mesh model. At the core, we represent the light field around the human
with a deformable two-surface parameterization, which enables fast and accurate
inference of the human appearance. This allows perceptual supervision on the
full image compared to previous approaches that could only supervise individual
pixels or small patches due to their slow runtime. Our carefully designed human
representation and supervision strategy leads to state-of-the-art synthesis results
and inference time. The video results and code are available at https://vcai.
mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/DELIFFAS.
1
Introduction
Generating photorealistic renderings of humans is a long-standing and important problem in Computer
Graphics and Vision with many applications in the movie industry, gaming, and AR/VR. Traditionally,
creating such digital avatars from real data involves complicated hardware setups and manual
intervention from experienced artists, followed by sophisticated physically-based rendering techniques
to render them into an image. Thus, recent research and also this work focuses on creating a drivable
and photoreal digital double of a real human learned solely from multi-view video data to circumvent
the complicated and manual work.
Recent works can be categorized by their underlying scene representation. Explicit mesh-based
methods represent the dynamic human by a deforming geometry and dynamic textures [15] or
textured body models [45]. While these explicit methods achieve a comparably fast inference speed,
the quality is still limited in terms of detail and photorealism. Hybrid approaches [14, 32] integrate
the coordinate-based MLP to an explicit (potentially deforming) geometry. While their synthesis
quality is drastically improved compared to explicit methods, the runtime is rather slow such that
real-time is out of reach. Last, the concept of light fields [13, 38, 5] is well known for decades and
recently, neural variants [47, 30, 55, 2, 52] have been proposed. Since ray-marching, i.e., sampling
multiple points along the ray, is not required, these methods are fast to evaluate. However, results are
∗This work was completed during an internship at MPII.
†Corresponding author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
arXiv:2310.11449v1  [cs.CV]  17 Oct 2023

Figure 1: We present DELIFFAS, a novel method for real-time, controllable, and highly-detailed
human rendering. Our method takes a skeletal motion and camera view as input and generates a
corresponding photorealistic image of the actor in real-time.
only shown on static scenes. Thus, previous work either demonstrated high synthesis quality or fast
inference speed. Our goal is to have a method, which achieves the best of the two worlds, i.e., high
synthesis quality and fast inference speed.
To this end, we propose DELIFFAS, a method for controllable, photorealistic, and fast neural human
rendering. Given a multi-view video of an actor and a corresponding deformable human mesh model,
which computes the deformed mesh as a function of the skeletal motion, we propose a deformable
light field parameterization around the template. Typically, a light field is parameterized by a 3D
position and a direction, however, this parameterization is neither robust nor efficient for deforming
scenes. Therefore, we propose a deformable two-surface representation parameterizing a surface
light field. In contrast to the original surface light field formulation, we deform the two surfaces
according to a deformable mesh model. This allows us to efficiently query highly detailed appearance
and even enables controllability since the light field can be driven by the skeletal motion. Due to the
high inference speed, our method is also able to render the entire image during training, which is in
stark contrast to coordinate-based approaches [32]. This allows us to employ perceptual supervision
on the entire image, which is in contrast to previous works that could only supervise individual pixels
or small patches due to their slow runtime. In summary, our technical contributions are:
• A novel real-time method for learning controllable and photorealistic avatars efficiently from
multi-view RGB videos.
• A deformable two-surface representation parameterizing a surface light field, which allows
efficient and highly accurate appearance synthesis.
• We show that our surface light field representation and our neural architecture design
can be effectively parallelized and integrated into the graphics pipeline enabling real-time
performance and also allowing us to employ full-image level perceptual supervision.
2
Related Work
Explicit Mesh-based Methods. Some methods use an explicit mesh template and estimate non-rigid
deformations and textures on the template mesh to fit the RGB input [60, 61]. Xu et al. [62] use
texture retrieval and stitching to synthesize a texture map for the novel view. Others [7, 54] propose
a layered texture representation to accelerate the image synthesis. These methods present limited
generalization to new poses and viewpoints. Thies et al. [53] learn deep features in the texture space.
Although they can represent view-dependent effects, it cannot generalize to novel poses. To address
this issue, DDC [15] leverages differentiable rendering techniques to learn non-rigid deformations and
texture maps on the explicit mesh. Given novel poses and views, DDC [15] can synthesize plausible
results in real time. However, our method demonstrates significantly improved visual quality while
also being real-time capable. Chen et al. [9] is a single surface-based method that is tightly bound to
the underlying mesh. In contrast, the proposed two-surface light field can compensate for potentially
erroneous geometry and synthesizes photoreal appearance beyond the mesh bounds.
Hybrid Methods. The synthesis quality of explicit meshed-based methods is bounded by the
limited resolution of the template mesh. On the other hand, neural implicit representations [49,
2

Figure 2: Method Overview. Given the skeletal motion and the target camera pose, we synthesize
highly detailed appearance of a subject in real-time using a surface light field parameterized by our
two surface representation. We first obtain the inner surface using the motion-dependent deformable
human model. The outer surface is constructed by offsetting the inner surface vertice along its normal.
For each camera ray, we obtain the uv coordinates of the intersecting points with the two surfaces
from the image-space uv maps. Then, we bilinearly sample the features at the corresponding uv
coordinates from the temporal normal feature map of each mesh. The two sampled features together
with the two intersecting uv coordinates are fed into the light field MLP, which generates the color
value. The rendered 2D image is supervised with L1 and perceptual losses.
33, 24, 37, 31, 48] have shown their advantages over explicit representations in 3D modeling. For
example, neural implicit representations are continuous, compact, and can achieve high spatial
resolution. However, neural implicit representations are not animatable as deformable meshes.
Therefore, recent studies propose to combine neural implicit representations with an explicit human
template. Peng et al. [43] use a coarse deformable model (SMPL [34]) as a 3D proxy to optimize
feature vectors, but it has limited pose generalizability. To address this issue, a large body of
work [32, 41, 8, 63, 51, 39, 20, 26, 11, 66, 56, 57, 29, 50, 42, 21, 64, 27] propose neural animatable
implicit representations. These works leverage the animatable 3D proxy to deform the space of
different poses to a shared canonical pose space. HDHumans [14], jointly optimizes the neural
implicit representation and the explicit mesh model. However, these methods suffer from slow
rendering speed, taking about 5 seconds to render one frame. In contrast, our method can achieve
real-time rendering (31fps) and produces higher-quality synthesis.
Light-field Methods. The 5D plenoptic function, which represents the intensity of light observed
from every position and direction in 3-dimensional space, was introduced by Bergen and Adelson [5].
Levoy et al. [28] reduce the light field to a 4D function with the two-plane parameterization, i.e., light
slab. Wood et al. [58] propose a surface light field, which maps a point on the base mesh and viewing
direction to the radiance. While they can parameterize a full 360-degree ray space, they cannot go
beyond the underlying mesh and can only represent a static scene. Recently, learning-based light field
approaches have been proposed. Convolutional neural network-based methods [23, 4, 36] learn to
interpolate and extrapolate the light field from a sparse set of views. Some works [30, 55, 2] achieve
high quality synthesis with the light field represented as an MLP. However, they are limited to the
fronto-parallel scene synthesis. To represent the full 360-degree ray space, some works [47, 52] utilize
Plücker and two-sphere parameterization [18, 6], respectively. However, none of the aforementioned
works can represent the full 360◦light space of a dynamic scene. Ouyang et al. [40] leverages multi-
plane image and perceptual supervision to render a photorealistic avatar in real-time. However, they
only allow minimal pose changes. In our work, we introduce a deformable two-surface representation
parameterizing the surface light field, which enables us to represent and control the dynamic scene,
i.e., the human, and to handle arbitrary poses during inference.
3
Method
Our goal is to learn an animatable 3D human character from multi-view videos, which can be rendered
photorealistically from novel views and in novel motions in real time. In this endeavor, we propose a
novel method, called DELIFFAS, which at inference takes a skeletal motion sequence and a target
3

camera pose as input and renders a high-quality image of the subject in the specified pose under the
virtual camera view at real-time framerates. An overview of our approach is shown in Fig. 2. At
the core, our method represents the digital human as a surface light field, which is parameterized by
two deforming surfaces that are directly controlled through the skeletal motion. Next, we provide
some background concerning our data assumptions, deformable surface representations, and light
fields (Sec. 3.1). Then, we introduce our deformable surface light field parameterized by a motion-
dependent deformable two-surface representation and how it can be efficiently rendered (Sec. 3.2).
Lastly, we introduce our perception-based supervision strategy (Sec. 3.3).
3.1
Background
Data Assumptions. We assume a segmented multi-view video of the actor, who is performing a
diverse set of motions, is given using C calibrated and synchronized cameras. Moreover, we also
assume the skeletal motion θf ∈RD for a frame f of the video can be obtained, e.g., by using
markerless motion capture. Here, D denotes the number of degrees of freedom of the skeleton.
Skeletal Motion-dependent Surface. In this work, we mainly focus on the question of how to
efficiently render a person at a photorealistic quality and less on surface reconstruction or model-
ing. Thus, we assume a skeletal motion-dependent deformable mesh surface s(θf,f−T ) = Vθf :
RT ×D →RN×3 of the human is given. Here, θf,f−T denotes the motion window from f −T to the
current pose f and Vθf denotes the deformed and posed mesh vertex positions at frame f with pose
θf. N is the number of vertices. In practice, we leverage the deformable human model of Habermann
et al. [16]. However, any other deformable surface representation such as SMPL [34] could be used
as well (see Sec. D for more discussions).
Light Field. The light field [13, 38, 5] is a function l(x, d) = c that maps an oriented camera ray,
here parameterized by its origin x ∈R3 and the direction d ∈R3, to the transmitted outgoing
radiance along the camera ray. Note that only a single evaluation per pixel is required when rendering
the light field into a discrete image, which is in stark contrast to the recently proposed Neural Radiance
Fields [37] that require hundreds of computationally expensive network evaluations along the ray.
Thus, light fields offer a computationally efficient alternative. Among the many possible ways of
parameterizing a ray, the two-plane parameterization [28], i.e., light slab, is the most commonly
used method. This two-plane method parameterizes a ray by its intersections with two planes U1
and U2 ∈[0, 1]2. Without loss of generality, we here define the planes being contained in a range
from zero to one and assume the field is always first intersecting U1 and then U2. Thus, the light field
formulation can be adapted to
  \la bel  {eq:light_slab} l(\mathbf {u}_1, \mathbf {u}_2) = \mathbf {c} 
(1)
where u1 ∈U1 and u2 ∈U2 are the intersection points of a ray with the planes. However, it is
hard to model full 360◦view changes with this light slab representation, and it originally was not
designed for controlling the scene, in our case the human. Thus, in the remainder of this section
we demonstrate how this classical concept can be extended to our setting and how our formulation
enables fast and photoreal renderings of humans.
3.2
Deformable Light Field Parameterization
As discussed above, one major challenge for the traditional two-plane representation is that it
cannot cover the full 360◦in terms of viewing directions. Thus, we first explain how we adopt this
representation using the deformed character mesh.
360◦Viewpoints. Since we have the deformed mesh Vθf , our idea is to adapt the two-plane
parameterization to a two-(non-planar)-surface parameterization using the deformed mesh. While the
inner surface (equivalent to U2) can be represented by the original mesh Vθf (denoted as Vinner
θf
in
the remainder), we have to construct an outer surface S1 for which we can guarantee that every ray
first intersects S1 before intersecting S2. This can be achieved by constructing an offset surface as
  \m
at hb f  {V}^{
\m at h r m  {out}
}_{\boldsymbol {\theta }_f,i} = \mathbf {V}^{\mathrm {inner}}_{\boldsymbol {\theta }_f,i} + d \cdot \mathbf {n}^{\mathrm {inner}}_{i} 
(2)
where i denotes the i-th vertex, ninner
i
is the respective normal on the inner surface, and d defines the
length of the offset. We use d=3cm in the experiments. By offsetting all vertices, we obtain the outer
surface Vout
θf . By assuming the mesh is watertight and that the origin o of a ray with direction d lies
4

outside of Vout
θf , we can guarantee that this ray will always intersect Vout
θf before Vinner
θf
. Note that
we can now have plausible intersections with the two surfaces from (almost) any point in 3D space
enabling 360◦viewpoints, which are typically difficult for the classical two-plane parameterization.
2D Surface Parameterization. Now if the ray intersects the outer and inner surface at pout and
pinner, respectively, we are interested in converting it into the original light slab parameterization
(Eq. 1) that solely consists of two 2D coordinates. We achieve this by performing UV mapping, i.e.,
we construct a texture atlas m(p) = w for the original mesh Vinner
θf
. m maps a point p on the 3D
surface to a 2D location w ∈[0, 1]2 on a plane. Note that the atlas remains the same across poses
since the connectivity of the mesh is fixed. Further, our offset surface construction also preserves
the texture atlas and, thus, the atlas for the outer surface is equivalent to the inner one. Now, our 3D
intersection points pout and pinner can be mapped to 2D as m(pout) = wout, m(pinner) = winner
and the light slab formulation can be adapted as
  \labe l {eq:l i ght_slab_uv} l(\mathbf {w}^\mathrm {out}, \mathbf {w}^\mathrm {inner}) = \mathbf {c}. 
(3)
Note that both 2D coordinates are not dependent on the motion of the character and, therefore, the
light field l cannot model motion-dependent appearance. Next, we further refine our formulation such
that l can potentially model this.
Skeletal Motion-dependent Conditioning. We note that the human mesh Vinner
θf
is already a
function of skeletal motion, though it is not in a format for efficient encoding considering the light
slab formulation. We convert the inner and outer surface into temporal normal maps [15] T inner
θ,f:f−T
and T out
θ,f:f−T , which are the concatenation of the posed normal maps of the motion window [f, f −T].
Note that both maps encode information about the skeletal motion and can be directly generated by
the motion-dependent mesh surface s(·).
Now, we deeply encode them into feature maps fΩ(T inner
θ,f:f−T ) and fΨ(T out
θ,f:f−T ) with a channel size
of 32 respectively using deep convolutional networks f with weights Ωand Ψ. Last, our light slab
formulation (Eq. 3) can be again refined as
  \label { eq:light_s lab_ou rs}
 l( \ga mm a ({\m athbf {w}^\
mathrm {o ut}}), \ g amma ({\mathbf {w}^\mathrm {inner}}), \Pi (f_\Psi (\mathcal {T}^\mathrm {out}_{\boldsymbol {\theta },f:f-T}), \mathbf {w}^\mathrm {out}), \Pi (f_\Omega (\mathcal {T}^\mathrm {inner}_{\boldsymbol {\theta },f:f-T}), \mathbf {w}^\mathrm {inner}) ) = \mathbf {c}.
(4)
Here, Π denotes the bilinear sampling operator. γ is the positional encoding [37]. Intuitively, the light
slab l takes the bilinearly sampled features on the UV plane at the uv coordinates of the intersections
points of the ray with the respective plane. Now, our light slab formulation is not only view-dependent
but is also motion-dependent since the features are encoding the skeletal motion.
In case the ray is not intersecting the inner surface, inspired by depth peeling, uv coordinates and
features are sampled at the second intersection with the outer surface. Here, the watertightness of
the model guarantees that such a second intersection point exists. We note that our light slab l is
represented as an 8-layer MLP with 256 channel-size.
Efficient Rendering. Next, we explain how the above formulation can be efficiently computed using
the standard graphics pipeline and deep learning tools. First, the two convolutional networks fΨ and
fΩhave to encode the respective normal maps. The computational effort is independent of the number
of foreground pixels, i.e., pixels which are covered by the subject. Next, for each pixel we have to
obtain the uv coordinates of the intersection points with the inner and outer surface. Here, standard
GPU-parallelized rasterization can be leveraged by rendering the uv coordinates into screen space.
The only computation that linearly scales with the number of foreground pixels is the evaluation
of the light slab l, but since there is only one evaluation per ray, also this step is computationally
efficient leading to an inference time of 31fps.
3.3
Supervision and Training Procedure
We supervise our approach by minimizing the following loss L = λ1 · L1 + λperc · Lperc, where L1
and Lperc are the L1 loss and perceptual [22] loss, respectively. λ1 and λperc are their weights. We
use the VGG-16 network [46] pre-trained on ImageNet [10] to compute the perceptual similarity loss.
Although our method solely supervised with the L1 loss already outperforms other real-time methods
and most of the non-real time methods on the novel view synthesis task (see Tab. 1a and Tab. 2-c), it
is still blurry. This is due to the one-to-many mapping problem [3, 32] where the single skeletal pose
can still induce various different appearances. Thus, the perceptual loss [22] is additionally employed
5

Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
Real-time
NB
29.94
42.15
109.98
✗
A-NeRF
29.54
35.27
86.90
✗
NA
30.21
23.60
18.56
✗
HDHumans
31.00
14.61
4.93
✗
NHR
28.39
46.07
116.59
✓
NV
25.49
85.69
123.19
✓
DDC
32.96
20.07
27.73
✓
Ours
33.30
12.85
8.69
✓
(a) View synthesis error on D2
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
Real-time
NB
29.37
43.99
115.70
✗
A-NeRF
28.42
38.74
95.56
✗
NA
28.43
28.33
24.50
✗
HDHumans
27.69
24.00
9.25
✗
NHR
28.08
47.65
122.60
✓
NV
23.32
98.35
139.82
✓
DDC
28.05
30.43
38.37
✓
Ours
27.95
26.59
26.16
✓
(b) Motion synthesis error on D2
Table 1: Quantitative results on novel view and pose synthesis. (a) Our method achieves the best
performance among all the real-time and non-real time methods in terms of PSNR and LPIPS, and the
second best performance on FID. (b) Our method again achieves high performance on the perceptual
metrics while running in real-time. While HDHumans has slightly better results in terms LPIPS and
FID compared to our work, their method is ×100 slower than our method.
and this improves the fine-grained details as can be seen in the ablation study (see Fig. 5-c,d). In
contrast to patch-based perceptual supervision methods [44, 35, 57, 12], our fast rendering speed
enables employing the perceptual supervision on the entire image.
4
Results
DELIFFAS runs at 31fps when rendering a 1K (940 × 1285) video using a single A-100 GPU with
an Intel Xeon CPU. The implementation details and additional results are provided in the appendix.
Dataset. We evaluate our method on the DynaCap dataset [16], which is publicly available. DynaCap
provides performance videos of 5 different subjects captured from 50 to 101 cameras, foreground
mask, and skeletal pose corresponding to each frame, and the template mesh for each subject. The
training and testing videos consist of around 20k and 5k frames at the resolution of 1K (1285 × 940),
respectively. Four cameras are held out for the testing and the remaining ones are used for the training
as proposed by the original dataset. Among the available subjects, we choose D1, D2, and D5
subjects for our experiments, which vary in terms of clothing style, i.e., loose skirts and trousers.
Metrics.
We evaluate our performance using the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR). However,
human perception cannot be fully reflected with this metric since a very blurry and unrealistic result
can still lead to a low error [65]. Therefore, we additionally employ the learned perceptual image
patch similarity (LPIPS) [65], and the Fréchet inception distance (FID) [17], which are similar to the
human perception. We generate and evaluate results at 1K resolution (1285 × 940). Every metric is
computed by averaging across the entire sequence using every 10th frame. Four held-out cameras (7,
18, 27, 40), which are uniformly sampled in the space, are used for the testing.
4.1
Qualitative Results
We first present the qualitative results on the novel view synthesis task in Fig. 3-(A) and on the novel
pose synthesis task in Fig. 3-(B). For both tasks, we show the synthesis result of the subject in two
different poses viewed from two different viewpoints. Our method synthesizes images with fine-scale
details including the facial features and wrinkles of the clothing for both tasks. Note that our method
can even generate plausible results of the subject in a challenging garment type, i.e., loose skirt.
Furthermore, we can synthesize high-quality renderings of the subject under difficult testing poses.
These results confirm the versatility as well as the generalization ability of our method.
4.2
Comparison
We compare our method with the state-of-the-art methods concerning novel view and pose synthesis.
We choose baselines from four different classes, which are volume rendering, explicit mesh, hybrid,
and point cloud-based methods. For the volume rendering-based method, we compare with Neural
Volumes (NV) [33], which learns a volumetric representation. Deep Dynamic Character (DDC) [16]
is an explicit mesh-based method, where the network learns to render the neural texture obtained by
rasterizing the explicit mesh. Neural Actor (NA) [32], Neural Body (NB) [43], and A-NeRF [51]
are hybrid methods that combine the human prior, i.e., naked human body model [34], and skeleton,
6

Figure 3: Qualitative results for novel view and poses. Our method achieves photorealistic rendering
quality while running in real time. We are able to recover the fine-grained details including the facial
features and clothing wrinkles. The high-quality synthesis results on the very challenging loose
garment, i.e., skirt, and the complicated testing poses show the versatility of our method.
Figure 4: Comparisons on the novel view and pose synthesis task on the D2 subject. Our method
synthesizes realistic and delicate details in real time (31fps). Note that we achieve similar or better
quality as offline approaches and show drastically improved quality compared to real-time methods.
7

Figure 5: Ablation of each design choice on the novel view synthesis task. All the variants except
(d) are trained only with L1 loss. Although conditioning on the viewing direction (b) improves
the quality, single-surface models (a,b) are tightly bounded to the underlying mesh. On the other
hand, our proposed method (c,d) can go beyond the mesh and recover the real geometry. Additional
utilization of the perceptual loss (d) improves the level of detail.
with a NeRF. Neural Actor (NA) achieves high-quality results by utilizing the adversarial supervision
in texture space. Neural Human Renderer (NHR) [59] optimizes features that are anchored to point
clouds. We additionally compare to the concurrent work HDHumans [14], which is a hybrid method
that combines the deformable human model [16] with a NeRF. Similar to NA, HDHumans also
employs adversarial supervision in texture space. We show our comparison results on the D2 subject
with tight clothing, as other baselines except DDC and HDHumans cannot handle the loose garment
types. Note that we present both the qualitative and quantitative results in the order of non-real time,
i.e., NB, A-NeRF, NA, HDHumans, and real-time methods, i.e., NHR, NV, DDC, and ours.
Fig. 4-(A) shows the comparison on the novel view synthesis task. Different from their original
results [43], NB produces blurry results when trained on longer and more challenging training
sequences, e.g., around 20k frames, as they fail to optimize the appearance code for every frame.
A-NeRF exhibits the loss of details under highly articulated poses. While DDC and NA can generate
coarse details, they still lack high-frequency details. On the other hand, our method can recover,
both, the coarse and fine details and only achieves slightly worse synthesis quality than HDHumans
while being significantly faster (×100). In Tab. 1a, our method outperforms all the non-real time and
real-time methods except HDHumans. However, we would like to highlight again that HDHumans
has a runtime in the order of seconds per frame, which prevents it from being used in any real-time
application. It is worth noting that ours with L1-only supervision (see Tab. 2-c) already outperforms
other real-time methods and even the non-real time method NA.
Fig. 4-(B) shows the comparisons on the novel pose synthesis task. Again, our method can recover
the sharp and high-frequency details that are close to the ones of HDHumans, while most of the
other approaches struggle with the given challenging pose. This is consistent with the quantitative
results in Tab. 1b, where we achieve the second best performance among all the methods and the best
performance among the real-time methods on the perception-based metrics LPIPS and FID. Due to
the innate nature of pose to appearance task, i.e., the one-to-many mapping [3, 32], our method can
generate realistic looking details that can deviate from the ground truth, which explains the lower
performance in terms of PSNR in Tab. 1b.
4.3
Ablation
We perform ablation studies on the novel view synthesis task on the D2 subject. To accurately access
the contribution of each component, we train all the variants only with L1 loss if not stated otherwise.
Impact of Two-surface Parameterization.
To study the efficacy of the two-surface parameteriza-
tion, we train the single-surface model (‘single-surface’) where the MLP generates color conditioned
only on a single inner surface intersection coordinates and feature. We also train a single-surface
variant that is additionally conditioned on the viewing direction (‘single-surface + viewing direction’).
In Tab. 2, our two-surface model (c) outperforms the single-surface variants (a,b). Also, we would
like to again stress that our L1-only supervised two-surface model (c) already surpasses all of the
real-time methods including DDC, and also outperforms the non-real time method NA, which is
trained with ground truth texture-map supervision and adversarial supervision. This confirms that the
8

Figure 6: Ablation on the deformable template quality. All baselines trained only with L1 loss.
When using a coarse mesh model the single-surface baseline (a) suffers from the geometric error of
the model. In contrast, our two-surface representation (b) has the capability of fixing geometric errors
and shows similar quality compared to the result when using the original mesh model (c).
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
a.
Single-surface
31.34
22.74
28.96
b.
Single-surface + viewing direction
32.19
20.38
23.88
c.
Two-surface with L1
33.27
18.51
23.58
d.
Two-surface with L1 + Lperc (Ours)
33.30
12.85
8.69
e.
Single-surface with coarse mesh
29.63
27.75
42.84
f.
Two-surface with coarse mesh
32.03
22.00
31.43
Table 2: Ablations on novel view synthesis for the D2 subject. All baselines except (d) are trained
with L1-only supervision. Our two-surface parameterization outperforms single-surface variants and
the perceptual supervision further improves visual quality. Further, our results when using a coarse
mesh model are still plausible demonstrating the robustness of our method.
improvement originates from the carefully-designed two-surface model. In Fig. 5, We visually ablate
the impact of each design choice. Although conditioning on the viewing direction (b) improves the
quality, the single-surface models (a,b) are tightly bound to the underlying mesh. On the other hand,
our two-surface models (c,d) go beyond the mesh and recover the real geometry.
Impact of Perceptual Supervision. Perceptual supervision improves the details (e.g., wrinkles) in
Fig. 5-d, which is also confirmed by the better performance in the perceptual metrics in Tab. 2-d.
Impact of Deformable Template Quality. To demonstrate the robustness of our method, we train
and evaluate our method with a smoothed version of the original mesh model in Fig. 6 and Tab. 2-e,f.
The quantitative result outperforms real-time methods including DDC in terms of PSNR. This shows
that even coarser geometry is sufficient for our representation. Moreover, the single-surface model
(Fig. 6-a) reveals and suffers from geometric error when the coarse template is used. On the other
hand, our two-surface representation (Fig. 6-b) has the capability of fixing geometric errors and
shows similar visual quality to the result when the original mesh model is used (Fig. 6-c).
5
Conclusion
We presented DELIFFAS, an animatable representation that can synthesize high-quality images of
the avatar under a user-controlled skeletal motion and viewpoint in real-time. At the technical core,
our method utilizes a surface light field parameterized with two deformable surfaces computed from a
deformable human model. Then, our light slab queries pose-dependent temporal normal map features
together with the intersecting uv coordinates in order to render the pixel color with just a single MLP
evaluation per pixel. This efficient rendering allows perceptual supervision on the entire image. Our
experiments show that the proposed representation can synthesize high-quality renderings even under
challenging poses, and outperforms the state-of-the-art real-time methods.
9

Acknowledgments. Christian Theobalt and Marc Habermann were supported by ERC Consolidator
Grant 4DReply (770784). Lingjie Liu was supported by Lise Meitner Postdoctoral Fellowship. This
work was partially supported by National Science Foundation Award 2107454.
References
[1] Agisoft. Metashape. http://www.agisoft.com, 2016.
[2] Benjamin Attal, Jia-Bin Huang, Michael Zollhöfer, Johannes Kopf, and Changil Kim. Learning neural
light fields with ray-space embedding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 19819–19829, 2022.
[3] Timur Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabian Prada, Takaaki Shiratori, Shih-En Wei, Weipeng
Xu, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Driving-signal aware full-body avatars. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–17, 2021.
[4] Mojtaba Bemana, Karol Myszkowski, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Tobias Ritschel. X-fields: Implicit neural
view-, light-and time-image interpolation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–15, 2020.
[5] James R Bergen and Edward H Adelson. The plenoptic function and the elements of early vision.
Computational models of visual processing, 1:8, 1991.
[6] Emilio Camahort, Apostolos Lerios, and Donald Fussell. Uniformly sampled light fields. In Eurographics
Workshop on Rendering Techniques, pages 117–130. Springer, 1998.
[7] Dan Casas, Marco Volino, John Collomosse, and Adrian Hilton. 4d video textures for interactive character
appearance. Comput. Graph. Forum, 33(2):0, May 2014.
[8] Jianchuan Chen, Ying Zhang, Di Kang, Xuefei Zhe, Linchao Bao, and Huchuan Lu. Animatable neural
radiance fields from monocular rgb video, 2021.
[9] Yue Chen, Xuan Wang, Xingyu Chen, Qi Zhang, Xiaoyu Li, Yu Guo, Jue Wang, and Fei Wang. Uv
volumes for real-time rendering of editable free-view human performance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 16621–16631, 2023.
[10] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 248–255.
Ieee, 2009.
[11] Qingzhe Gao, Yiming Wang, Libin Liu, Lingjie Liu, Christian Theobalt, and Baoquan Chen. Neural novel
actor: Learning a generalized animatable neural representation for human actors. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2023.
[12] Xuan Gao, Chenglai Zhong, Jun Xiang, Yang Hong, Yudong Guo, and Juyong Zhang. Reconstructing
personalized semantic facial nerf models from monocular video. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
41(6):1–12, 2022.
[13] Andre¯ı Gershun. The light field. Journal of Mathematics and Physics, 18(1-4):51–151, 1939.
[14] Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Gerard Pons-Moll, Michael Zollhoefer, and Christian Theobalt.
Hdhumans: A hybrid approach for high-fidelity digital humans. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 6(3):1–23, 2023.
[15] Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt.
Real-time deep dynamic characters. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(4), jul 2021.
[16] Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt.
Real-time deep dynamic characters. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–16, 2021.
[17] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[18] Insung Ihm, Sanghoon Park, and Rae Kyoung Lee. Rendering of spherical light fields. In Proceedings The
Fifth Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications, pages 59–68. IEEE, 1997.
[19] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 1125–1134, 2017.
[20] Zhang Jiakai, Liu Xinhang, Ye Xinyi, Zhao Fuqiang, Zhang Yanshun, Wu Minye, Zhang Yingliang, Xu Lan,
and Yu Jingyi. Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. In ACM SIGGRAPH,
2021.
[21] Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural human
radiance field from a single video, 2022.
[22] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and
super-resolution. In European conference on computer vision, pages 694–711. Springer, 2016.
[23] Nima Khademi Kalantari, Ting-Chun Wang, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Learning-based view synthesis for
light field cameras. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(6):1–10, 2016.
[24] Srinivas Kaza et al. Differentiable volume rendering using signed distance functions. PhD thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019.
10

[25] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[26] Youngjoong Kwon, Dahun Kim, Duygu Ceylan, and Henry Fuchs. Neural human performer: Learning
generalizable radiance fields for human performance rendering. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34:24741–24752, 2021.
[27] YoungJoong Kwon, Dahun Kim, Duygu Ceylan, and Henry Fuchs. Neural image-based avatars: Generaliz-
able radiance fields for human avatar modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[28] Marc Levoy and Pat Hanrahan. Light field rendering. In Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 31–42, 1996.
[29] Ruilong Li, Julian Tanke, Minh Vo, Michael Zollhofer, Jurgen Gall, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Christoph
Lassner. Tava: Template-free animatable volumetric actors. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2022.
[30] Celong Liu, Zhong Li, Junsong Yuan, and Yi Xu. Neulf: Efficient novel view synthesis with neural 4d
light field. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.07112, 2021.
[31] Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Christian Theobalt. Neural sparse voxel fields.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
[32] Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and Christian Theobalt.
Neural actor: Neural free-view synthesis of human actors with pose control. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(6),
dec 2021.
[33] Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Gabriel Schwartz, Andreas Lehrmann, and Yaser Sheikh.
Neural volumes: Learning dynamic renderable volumes from images. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 38(4):65, 2019.
[34] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. SMPL: A
skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 34(6):248:1–248:16,
Oct. 2015.
[35] Marko Mihajlovic, Aayush Bansal, Michael Zollhoefer, Siyu Tang, and Shunsuke Saito. Keypointnerf:
Generalizing image-based volumetric avatars using relative spatial encoding of keypoints. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part
XV, pages 179–197. Springer, 2022.
[36] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Rodrigo Ortiz-Cayon, Nima Khademi Kalantari, Ravi Ramamoorthi,
Ren Ng, and Abhishek Kar. Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with prescriptive sampling
guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(4):1–14, 2019.
[37] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren
Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In Andrea Vedaldi, Horst
Bischof, Thomas Brox, and Jan-Michael Frahm, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, pages 405–421,
Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[38] Parry Moon and Domina Eberle Spencer. The photic field. Cambridge, 1981.
[39] Atsuhiro Noguchi, Xiao Sun, Stephen Lin, and Tatsuya Harada. Neural articulated radiance field. In
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
[40] Hao Ouyang, Bo Zhang, Pan Zhang, Hao Yang, Jiaolong Yang, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, and Fang Wen.
Real-time neural character rendering with pose-guided multiplane images. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 192–209. Springer, 2022.
[41] Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou.
Animatable neural radiance fields for human body modeling. ICCV, 2021.
[42] Sida Peng, Chen Geng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei Zhou, and
Hujun Bao. Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for human body modeling. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2023.
[43] Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou.
Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for novel view synthesis of
dynamic humans. CVPR, 1(1):9054–9063, 2021.
[44] Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance fields for
3d-aware image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:20154–20166, 2020.
[45] Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Zakharov, Kara-Ali Aliev, Renat Bashirov, Egor Burkov, Karim Iskakov,
Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Yury Malkov, Igor Pasechnik, Dmitry Ulyanov, Alexander Vakhitov, and Victor
Lempitsky. Textured neural avatars. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2019.
[46] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recogni-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[47] Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, Bill Freeman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Fredo Durand. Light field
networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 34:19313–19325, 2021.
11

[48] Vincent Sitzmann, Justus Thies, Felix Heide, Matthias Nießner, Gordon Wetzstein, and Michael Zollhofer.
Deepvoxels: Learning persistent 3d feature embeddings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2437–2446, 2019.
[49] Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Continuous
3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 1119–1130, 2019.
[50] Shih-Yang Su, Timur Bagautdinov, and Helge Rhodin. Danbo: Disentangled articulated neural body
representations via graph neural networks. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2022.
[51] Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollhoefer, and Helge Rhodin. A-nerf: Surface-free human 3d pose
refinement via neural rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06199, 2021.
[52] Mohammed Suhail, Carlos Esteves, Leonid Sigal, and Ameesh Makadia. Light field neural rendering. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8269–8279,
2022.
[53] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhöfer, and Matthias Nießner. Deferred neural rendering: Image synthesis using
neural textures. Acm Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(4):1–12, 2019.
[54] Marco Volino, Dan Casas, John Collomosse, and Adrian Hilton. Optimal representation of multiple view
video. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference. BMVA Press, 2014.
[55] Peng Wang, Yuan Liu, Guying Lin, Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
Progressively-connected light field network for efficient view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04465,
2022.
[56] Shaofei Wang, Katja Schwarz, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. Arah: Animatable volume rendering of
articulated human sdfs. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2022.
[57] Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
Humannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video. arXiv, 2022.
[58] Daniel N Wood, Daniel I Azuma, Ken Aldinger, Brian Curless, Tom Duchamp, David H Salesin, and
Werner Stuetzle. Surface light fields for 3d photography. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the
Boundaries, Volume 2, pages 487–496, 2023.
[59] Minye Wu, Yuehao Wang, Qiang Hu, and Jingyi Yu. Multi-view neural human rendering. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1682–1691, 2020.
[60] Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabian Prada, Javier Romero, Weipeng Xu, Shunsuke
Saito, Jingfan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shiratori, et al. Dressing avatars: Deep photorealistic
appearance for physically simulated clothing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(6):1–15, 2022.
[61] Donglai Xiang, Fabian Prada, Zhe Cao, Kaiwen Guo, Chenglei Wu, Jessica Hodgins, and Timur Bagaut-
dinov. Drivable avatar clothing: Faithful full-body telepresence with dynamic clothing driven by sparse
rgb-d input. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023, 2023.
[62] Feng Xu, Yebin Liu, Carsten Stoll, James Tompkin, Gaurav Bharaj, Qionghai Dai, Hans-Peter Seidel,
Jan Kautz, and Christian Theobalt. Video-based characters: Creating new human performances from a
multi-view video database. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’11, pages 32:1–32:10, New
York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[63] Hongyi Xu, Thiemo Alldieck, and Cristian Sminchisescu. H-nerf: Neural radiance fields for rendering and
temporal reconstruction of humans in motion, 2021.
[64] Jae Shin Yoon, Duygu Ceylan, Tuanfeng Y Wang, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, Zhixin Shu, and Hyun Soo
Park. Learning motion-dependent appearance for high-fidelity rendering of dynamic humans from a single
camera. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
3407–3417, 2022.
[65] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 586–595, 2018.
[66] Zerong Zheng, Han Huang, Tao Yu, Hongwen Zhang, Yandong Guo, and Yebin Liu. Structured local
radiance fields for human avatar modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 15893–15903, 2022.
12

A
Appendix - Overview
This appendix is organized as follows: Sec. B shows additional results including video results,
ablations on image-level and patch-level perceptual supervision, ablation study with and without
perceptual supervision, ablations on the single surface with the same network capacity, results when
using SMPL, comparison with traditional multi-view stereo method; Sec. C provides information
regarding the reproducibility, which includes implementation details, training details, and runtime at
inference; Sec. D discusses the performance changes according to the template mesh quality, and
possible alternatives for the template mesh; Sec. E presents the societal impacts our work can have;
Sec. F discusses the limitations of this work.
B
Additional Results
B.1
Video Results
Video results of free-viewpoint renderings, novel view and pose synthesis, and comparison with the
state-of-the-art baselines on the DynaCap dataset [16] can be found at https://vcai.mpi-inf.
mpg.de/projects/DELIFFAS. We compare our DELIFFAS with the non-real-time hybrid method
Neural Actor [32], and real-time explicit mesh-based method Deep Dynamic Characters [16].
B.2
Ablation on Image-level and Patch-level Perceptual Supervision
To study the impact of our full image-level supervision, we train a variant with patch-level perceptual
supervision. Here, we use a 32 × 32 patch. In Tab. 3, our approach trained with full-image-level
perceptual supervision (Tab. 3-c) outperforms the patch-level variant (Tab. 3-b) in terms of the
perceptual metrics. In Fig. 7, we ablate the visual impact. Employing full-image-level supervision
leads to better reconstruction of details (e.g., wrinkles). We would like to again highlight that image-
level supervision with perceptual loss is possible thanks to the fast rendering speed of our method.
Figure 7: Ablation of patch-based and image-level perceptual supervision. Variants with the
perceptual supervision (b,c) shows better details than the result with L1-only supervision (a). Our
final model which employs the full image-level perceptual supervision (c) outperforms the variant
with patch-level supervision (b).
B.3
Ablation Study with and without Perceptual Supervision
We excluded the perceptual supervision from the ablation study in the main text (see Tab. 2, Fig. 5,
and Fig. 6) to verify the effectiveness of our two-surface design. In Tab. 4 and Fig. 8, we show the
ablation results with perceptual supervision. Similar to the results without perceptual supervision,
our full model outperforms other variants.
13

Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
a.
Image-level with L1
33.27
18.51
23.58
b.
Patch-level with L1 + Lperc
33.24
16.54
18.96
c.
Image-level with L1 + Lperc (Ours)
33.30
12.85
8.69
Table 3: Ablation on image-level and patch-level supervision. Applying the perceptual supervision
on the entire image (c) leads to better results than the patch-level perceptual supervision (b) or
L1-only supervision.
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
L1
a.
Single-surface
31.34
22.74
28.96
b.
Single-surface + viewing direction
32.19
20.38
23.88
c.
Single-surface + two U-Net
31.47
15.43
19.99
d.
Two-surface (Ours)
33.27
18.51
23.58
e.
Single-surface with coarse mesh
29.63
27.75
42.84
f.
Two-surface with coarse mesh
32.03
22.00
31.43
L1 + Lperc
g.
Single-surface
31.36
16.53
10.90
h.
Single-surface + viewing direction
31.95
15.96
9.01
i.
Single-surface + two U-Net
31.26
16.21
9.61
j.
Two-surface (Ours)
33.30
12.85
8.69
k.
Single-surface with coarse mesh
29.55
20.05
15.22
l.
Two-surface with coarse mesh
32.03
16.13
12.08
Table 4: Ablations on novel view synthesis for the D2 subject with and without perceptual
supervision. Our two-surface parameterization performs better than the single-surface variants and
the perceptual supervision further boosts the visual quality. In addition, our results with coarse mesh
model shows reasonable performance, which confirms the robustness of our method.
B.4
Ablations on the Single Surface with the Same Network Capacity
The number of total parameters is larger in the two-surface model than in the single-surface model as
it includes two separate U-Nets for extracting feature map from each surface while the single-surface
model only has a single U-Net. The U-Net and MLP architecture used in both single and two-surface
models are the same. To verify that the performance boost originates from the two-surface design
rather than the increase in network capacity, we additionally trained a “single-surface with two
concatenated U-Net” variant (see Fig. 9, Tab. 4-c,i). Even though now the network size is the same,
our two-surface representation still outperforms the single-surface baseline.
B.5
Using SMPL as the Deformable Mesh Surface
We conduct an experiment where we use the SMPL model as the deformable mesh model (see
Fig. 10). One can see that our approach even for this very coarse model still outperforms the baselines
proving the flexibility of our representation while a better template mesh further improves the results.
B.6
Comparison with Traditional Multi-view Stereo Method
We compare with the commercial photogrammetry software, Metashape [1] in Fig. 11. The recon-
structed surface is noisy and the texture suffers from ghosting artifacts due to the inaccurate geometry.
Also, Metashape takes 6 minutes to reconstruct while ours works in real-time (31fps). Lastly, our
method is animatable, while multi-view stereo methods are not.
14

Figure 8: Ablations on novel view synthesis for the D2 subject with and without perceptual
supervision. The proposed two-surface representation helps to recover the real geometry while the
single-surface design is limited to the underlying mesh. Perceptual supervision further enhances the
quality.
Figure 9: Ablations on the single surface with the same network capacity. Evaluated on the
novel view synthesis task for the D2 subject. Even though the network size of the “single-surface
with two U-Net” variant and ours are the same, our two-surface representation still outperforms the
single-surface baseline. This again verifies that the performance boost is coming from the two-surface
design, and not from using more network.
15

Figure 10: Ablations on using SMPL as a deformable human model. Evaluated on the novel view
synthesis task for the D2 subject. Our method with very coarse SMPL mesh can still recover the real
geometry compared to the single surface baseline where the approach can only paint on the given
mesh.
C
Reproducibility
C.1
Implementation Details
Feature Extractor. The feature extractor for each surface is based on the same U-Net architecture [19].
We use the feature extractor to encode the temporal normal map (T + 1) × 1024 × 1024 × 3 into the
1024 × 1024 × 32 feature map. Here, the temporal normal map is the concatenation of the posed
normal maps of the motion window [f, f −T]. The feature extractor consists of 10 down-sampling
layers (with a down-sampling rate of two) and 10 up-sampling layers (with an up-sampling rate of
two). There is a skip connection between every corresponding down and upsampling layer.
Light Field MLP. The light field MLP consists of 8 layer with 256 channel size. ReLU activation
is used in between the layers. Input to the light field MLP are the positional encodings of two
intersection uv coordinates. Then we concatenate the temporal normal map features sampled from
the inner and outer surface to the intermediate output of 4th layer. Output of the light field MLP is
the 3-channel RGB value.
C.2
Training Details
Deformable Human Model.
We leverage the deformable human model of Habermann et al. [16],
i.e., DDC. The geometry networks of the DDC model are additionally trained with a Chamfer distance
supervision with respect to 4D multi-view stereo reconstructions. Originally, we reported the numbers
provided by the authors of DDC in Tab. 1. We trained TexNet of DDC with our exact checkpoint for
16

Figure 11: Comparison with MVS method (Metashape). We compare with the commercial pho-
togrammetry software, Metashape [1]. The reconstructed surface is noisy and the texture exhibits
ghosting artifacts. Also, Metashape takes 6 minutes to reconstruct while ours work in real-time
(31fps). Lastly, our method is animatable, while multi-view stereo methods are not.
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
DDC (paper)
32.96
20.07
27.73
DDC (same geometry network)
29.50
32.66
44.18
Ours
33.30
12.85
8.69
(a) View synthesis error on D2
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
DDC (paper)
28.05
30.43
38.37
DDC (same geometry network)
26.59
43.43
61.92
Ours
27.95
26.59
26.16
(b) Motion synthesis error on D2
Table 5: We trained TexNet of DDC with our exact checkpoint for the geometry networks (EGNet
and DeltaNet) that are trained with Chamfer distance to alleviate any other influence. We found
that our geometry checkpoint has even a lower performance than the original one. Note that our
representation clearly outperforms DDC.
the geometry networks trained with Chamfer distance supervision (EGNet and DeltaNet) to alleviate
any other influence. We found that our geometry checkpoint has lower performance than the original
one. Note that our representation clearly outperforms DDC (see Tab. 5). Moreover, our ablation
‘single surface + viewing direction’ (Fig. 5-b,Tab. 2-b) can be considered as a variant of DDC further
confirming the superiority of our appearance representation.
DELIFFAS.
Both the feature extractors and light field MLP are trained in an end-to-end manner
using Adam optimizer [25]. We used the learning rate of 2 × 10−4. We train on a single RTX 8000
48G GPU with a single batch size. We supervise our approach by minimizing the following loss
L = λ1 ·L1 +λperc ·Lperc, where L1 and Lperc are the L1 loss and perceptual [22] loss, respectively.
λ1 and λperc are their weights. For the first 940k iterations, λ1 is set to one, and λperc is set to zero.
Then, we set λ1 and λperc so that the magnitude of each loss term is roughly the same and train for
additional 350k iterations.
C.3
Runtime at Inference
We report our runtime on the novel pose synthesis task of D2 subject. DELIFFAS runs at 31fps
for rendering a single 1K (940 × 1285) image on a single A100 GPU with an Intel Xeon CPU. The
detailed breakdown of runtime is as follows.
Our pipeline can be divided into three stages: (1) obtaining UV (2) feature map generation (CNN)
(3) MLP forwarding to get the final color value. (1) Obtaining UV: We utilize a GPU accelerated
rasterizer to render the image space UV map, which takes 3.58 ms. (2) Feature map generation
(CNN): Our U-Nets generate normal feature maps in 18.85 ms. (3) MLP forwarding to compute
the final color: We take 6.78ms to bi-linearly sample the feature corresponding to each pixel, and
then the light field MLP takes 2.52ms to compute the color value. In total, DELIFFAS takes 31.73
ms to render a single 1K image.
17

Figure 12: Ablations on the deformable template quality with and without perceptual supervision.
Evaluated on the novel view synthesis task for the D2 subject. Even when using the coarse mesh, our
two-surface design enables to generate visual quality similar to the rendering result using original
mesh. Employing the perceptual supervision further improves the quality.
Note that we assume the output of the deformable character model, i.e., DDC [16], is already available
at training and inference time. DDC is also a real-time method so coupling DDC and our method
would not deteriorate the performance much.
We would like to highlight that our method achieves the best of two worlds: runs in real-time as the
explicit mesh-based method DDC (25fps), while at the same time achieving superior and comparable
visual quality to the hybrid method NA (0.2fps) and HDHumans (0.3fps), respectively.
When tested on an A40 graphics card, we achieve a real-time speed of 26fps. Furthermore, most
of our computational budget is taken by the U-Net feature map extraction ( 60%) and deterministic
bi-linear sampling of features ( 20%). We use a standard U-Net architecture and Tensorflow’s bi-linear
sampling, but more efficient architecture and sampling implementation can be explored to further
reduce the runtime.
D
Discussion on the Template Mesh Quality
Rendering Quality. Our performance degrades if a coarser mesh is used. However, note that our
method with coarse geometry or even SMPL mesh can still recover the real geometry compared to the
single surface baseline where the approach can only paint on the given mesh (see Fig. 6, Fig. 10, and
Fig. 12). Also, it would be an interesting research direction if we could jointly refine the underlying
mesh during training and improve the rendering quality.
Possible Alternatives to the Deformable Human Model. The deformable human model we used in
the main text is DDC [16]. Alternatively, one can use the SMPL model (see Fig. 10) or SMPL+D to
deal with the loose clothing. Also, we can use recent avatar NeRF works [64, 21, 42] to compute the
canonical mesh (template mesh) and then use skinning-based deformation to obtain the deformed
mesh for the new pose.
18

E
Societal Impacts
Our research presents potential societal impacts that should be considered. Our method can create
avatars using only RGB supervision, which has the potential to democratize immersive VR expe-
riences. Unlike traditional methods that rely on costly setups and specialized professionals, our
approach offers accessibility to a wider range of individuals. Additionally, digital doubles generated
through our techniques can be used to perform dangerous stunts, reducing risks for human actors.
Moreover, individuals can engage in virtual exploration using their personalized avatars.
However, it is important to acknowledge the potential negative consequences associated with our
method. The generation of fake media poses a significant risk, potentially leading to public misin-
formation and eroding trust in media content. We recognize these concerns and emphasize the need
for public awareness, responsible use, and disclosure. We strive and strongly hope that our work is
applied in ways that positively impact society.
F
Limitations
Although our method achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of visual quality and runtime, it is
not free from limitations. For now, we consider the deformable surface representation is given as
an input and our method builds up on it. However, surface deformation and image synthesis can
be treated jointly and help to improve each other. Inspired by that, future work could extend our
deformable two-surface light field representation such that it can backpropagate into the geometry
directly and, thus, potentially refine it throughout the training process. Moreover, the face and hand
are not animatable. Extending our work to support the face and hand animation would enhance the
versatility of our method and enable many interesting applications such as gaming, and VR. Very
complex clothing (e.g., highly glossy garment) might be challenging, though, in contrast to many
related works, we demonstrate that loose clothing can work while most other methods only operate
under the assumption of tight clothing. The input to our system is a temporal normal map and it is not
sufficient enough to fully describe the subject’s clothing state which can result in rather blurry images.
This is why we employed perceptual supervision so that we can recover the fine details. However, it
would be a promising direction to adopt the generative models (e.g., GAN, VAE) to generate even
more photorealistic details.
19
