LLM-Cave: A benchmark and light environment for
large language models reasoning and
decision-making system
1st Huanyu Li
College of Artificial Intelligence
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
2211286@mail.nankai.edu.cn
2nd Zongyuan Li
College of Artificial Intelligence
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
2120230524@mail.nankai.edu.cn
4th Xian Guo*
College of Artificial Intelligence
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
guoxian@nankai.edu.cn
*Corresponding Author
3rd Wei Huang
College of Artificial Intelligence
Nankai University
Tianjin, China
huangw@mail.nankai.edu.cn
Abstract—Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT
o1, ChatGPT o3, and DeepSeek R1 have shown great potential
in solving difficult problems. However, current LLM evalua-
tion benchmarks are limited to one-step interactions. Some of
the existing sequence decision-making environments, such as
TextStarCraftII and LLM-PySC2, are too complicated and require
hours of interaction to complete a game. In this paper, we
introduce LLM-Cave, a benchmark and light environment for
LLM reasoning and decision-making systems. This environment
is a classic instance in the era of Symbolism. Artificial intelli-
gence enables the agent to explore the environment and avoid
potential losses by reasoning about nearby dangers using partial
observable state information. In the experiment, we evaluated the
sequential reasoning ability, decision-making performance and
computational efficiency of mainstream large language models
(LLMs) such as GPT-4o-mini, o1-mini, and DeepSeek-R1. Ex-
periments show that while Deepseek-R1 achieved the highest
success rate on complex reasoning tasks, smaller models like 4o-
mini significantly narrowed the performance gap on challenges
by employing Chain of Speculation and Planner-Critic strategies,
at the expense of reduced computational efficiency. This indicates
that structured, multi-step reasoning combined with an LLM-
based feedback mechanism can substantially enhance an LLM’s
decision-making capabilities, providing a promising direction for
improving reasoning in weaker models and suggesting a new
reasoning-centered benchmark for LLM assessment. Our code
is open-sourced in https://github.com/puleya1277/CaveEnv.
Index Terms—Large language models, reasoning, benchmark,
sequential decision-making
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, unprecedented advancements have been
witnessed in large language models, exemplified by models
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 624B2074 and Grant 62233011.
such as GPT, Claude, Grok, Gemini and Deepseek. These
models, trained on vast corpora of text and leveraging scal-
able transformer-based frameworks, have achieved remarkable
performance across diverse natural language processing tasks,
including text generation, translation, and question-answering.
Beyond these capabilities, their emergent abilities in mul-
timodal understanding, code generation, and context-aware
interaction have positioned LLMs as foundational tools in
artificial intelligence research. The integration of techniques
like reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and
reinforcement learning based finetune (RLFT) have further en-
hanced their alignment with human intent or task requirements,
enabling deployment in real-world applications ranging from
education to creative industries.
A critical frontier in LLM development lies in improving
their reasoning abilities. Techniques such as chain-of-thought
prompting [1], LLM self-reflection [2], Retrieval-Augmented
Generation and online deep-search have enabled models to
tackle complex logical, mathematical, and inferential tasks.
These advancements have catalyzed societal transformations,
such as AI gaming [3], AI-assisted financial decision-making
[4], robot navigation [5] [6] [7], and manipulation [8] [9].
However, the reasoning ability of current models is not exactly
equal to logic ability. Current QA benchmarks may already
exist in the pre-training or fine-tuning process, which raises
concerns about the reliability of the actual logic abilities,
especially in environments that are not trained in the pre-
training process.
Current benchmarks for evaluating the reasoning ability of
LLMs, such as MMLU, GSM8K, and Humanity’s Last Exam,
arXiv:2511.22598v1  [cs.LG]  27 Nov 2025

predominantly focus on single-step question-answering (QA)
tasks. While effective for measuring factual recall or short de-
ductive reasoning, these datasets fail to capture the complexity
of real-world problems requiring multi-step planning, iterative
refinement, and dynamic environment interaction. Such limi-
tations hinder the assessment of the LLMs’ ability to man-
age long-term tasks, where errors compound over sequential
decisions, and adaptive strategies are essential for success.
Consequently, a gap exists between existing benchmarks and
the demands of practical, multi-step decision-making scenarios.
For long-term decision-making, recent efforts have in-
troduced sequential decision-making environments such as
TextStarCraft2 [10] and LLM-PySC2 [11], which provide
interfaces for the strategic game StarCraft II through text-
based interfaces. While these platforms enable research into
multi-step reasoning and real-time planning, their reliance
on heavy computational infrastructure, complex rule systems,
and extensive API dependencies creates significant overhead.
Such burdens limit accessibility for researchers, hinder rapid
experimentation, and obscure the interpretability of model
behavior—issues that demand lightweight, scalable alternatives
for widespread adoption.
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Grids
Explored 
Grids
To Explore
Gold
Agent
Wumpus
(Dangerous)
Pit
(Dangerous) 
LLM/LLM Agent
LLM-Cave Environment
Observation:
Valid Actions: <moveto(1,4)>, ...
Observation: {"current pos": (1,3)
                         "breeze": (1,3), ......}
Assumptions: {"pit":[], "wumpus": []}
     
Response:
Analysis: ......
Guess:  {"pit": [(1, 4), (2, 3)],  
                "wumpus": []}
Action:  <MoveTo(2, 2)>
      
Stench
(Safe)
Breeze
(Safe) 
Fig. 1. LLM-Cave Environment. In the LLM-Cave environment, the LLM
controls a game agent; the agent has to explore the cave and find the gold.
In the cave, the agent can only get the information of the current grid, while
there are pits (holes) and wumpus (monster) that may kill the agent. Near the
pits and wumpus are breeze and stench. The LLM should reason the position
of the pit and wumpus according to the observed information of breeze and
stench to safely explore the cave and find the gold.
In this paper, we introduce LLM-Cave, a novel benchmark
framework and lightweight environment specifically designed
for evaluating and enhancing the reasoning and decision-
making abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). This
environment not only tests the ability of large language models
in planning and reasoning but also their flexibility in the face
of complex problems. The environment maintains a lightweight
design, facilitating ease of deployment and interpretability of
results while precisely capturing the intricacies inherent in
sequential reasoning. Within LLM-Cave, we further implement
the Chain of Speculation and Planner-Critic mechanisms. The
performer-critic mechanism gives the model a “self-reflective”
capability. Without human intervention, the model can indepen-
dently evaluate its own decisions and adjust its direction when
necessary. This makes the entire decision-making process more
robust and reliable.
In our experiments, we evaluated the sequential reasoning
capabilities of several prominent LLMs, including OpenAI
GPT-4o-mini, o1-mini, Claude 3.5, Gemini 2.5 Flash, and
DeepSeek-R1, within the LLM-Cave environment. The ex-
perimental results show clear differences. On the one hand,
reasoning-oriented models such as DeepSeek-R1 tend to be
able to deduce reasonable strategies with little external prompts.
On the other hand, models that lack reasoning ability often
struggle to make optimal moves when confronted with a prob-
lem. However, after employing our Chain of Speculation and
Planner-Critic collaborative mechanisms, performance among
weaker models improved notably. Compared to their zero-shot
or initial baseline attempts, these models exhibited a reduction
in logical errors and an increased success rate.
Our contributions include:
(1) We propose a lightweight, text-based environment explic-
itly designed for assessing the reasoning and decision-making
capabilities of LLMs.
(2) We introduce the Chain of Speculation inference strategy,
which requires the LLM to make a guess about the hazard and
explicitly propagate the guess to the next step.
(3) We develop an LLM-driven dual-role feedback frame-
work in which a Planner generates decisions informed by
the current Chain of Speculation while a Critic evaluates the
correctness of these outputs and proposes optimizations.
(4)We assessed the decision-making ability and computing
efficiency of leading large-language models (LLMs).
The code of the LLMCave environment has been open-so/
*-urced in GitHub https://github.com/puleya1277/CaveEnv.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. LLM Decision making
LLM decision-making problems have been studied for sev-
eral years since ChatGPT came into view. Early works such as
Stanford Town [12] focused on LLMs’ behaviors, and LLMs
exhibit human-like behaviors. After that, more and more works
tested LLM’s decision-making abilities in games like ChatDev
[13], CRADLE [14], LlamaRider [15], SwarmBrain [16] and
TextStarCraft2. In the field of robotics, LLMs are also used
in robotic manipulation and navigation. These works show
the potential of LLM in sequential decision-making, but these
environments are not widely used as benchmarks for LLMs
because of their complexity and high demand for computational
resources and token consumption.
B. LLM Reasoning Enhancing Techniques
In September 2024, OpenAI released the first long CoT
model, GPT-o1. Since then, techniques for enhancing LLM
reasoning ability have attracted increasing attention. Train-free

prompt engineering methods like Chain-of-Draft [17] increase
LLM’s performance directly through input instructions, while
Multi-Agent LLM System [14] improves the performance by
splitting tasks into smaller subtasks, enhancing the tool use and
coding abilities [18] to better handle problems. For training
methods, cold start supervised training, RLHF and RLFT
increase the performance by directly updating the parameters
of the models.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Markov Decision Process
Within the framework of sequential decision modeling, a
Markov decision process (MDP) establishes that the state at
any given moment is independent of future actions. Over the
last decade, MDP has become a standard paradigm for mod-
eling sequential decision-making challenges, including optimal
control strategies, policy optimization, reinforcement learning,
and collaborative multi-agent systems.
An MDP structure denoted as MDP(S, A, R, ρ, s0) orig-
inating at s0 operates through iterative interactions: At each
timestep t, the agent observes current environment information
st of state space S and selects an execution command at from
action space A. The environment subsequently produces an
immediate feedback signal rt determined by the reward func-
tion rt = R(st, at), and transitioning to successor state st+1
according to transition dynamics pst+1 = ρ(st+1|st, at). For
scenarios with incomplete state information, the model extends
to partially observable MDP POMDP(O, S, A, R, ρ, s0), in-
troducing observation domain O where ot ∈O denotes the
observation at timestep t.
B. LLM Decision Making Process
For LLM-based decision making, we denote p as profile or
system prompt, and the LLM makes decisions according to
bat = LLMp(bot)
where b. represents any data in text form. In CoT settings, an
LLM will be prompted to respond as:
(bc1, bc2, ...bcn)CoT = LLMp(bIt)
where content bci+1 is generated after bci and bIt represent input
content.
IV. METHOD
The chain of thought (CoT) approach enables the model to
explicitly output the analysis process, thereby improving the
decision-making capability of large models [1]. We build on
CoT by introducing two core components to the LLM agent:
the Chain of Speculation mechanism for long-term reasoning
memory and the Planner-Critic mechanism for decision verifi-
cation. Below, we describe each component in detail.
LLM-Cave Environment
Observation:
Valid Actions: <moveto(1,4)>, ...
Observation: {"current pos": (1,3)
                         "breeze": (1,3), ......}
Assumptions: {"pit":[], "wumpus": []}
     
Actor(Planner)
Action:  <MoveTo(2, 2)>
      
Guess:  {"pit": [(1, 4), (2, 3)],  
                "wumpus": []}      
Analysis : ......
Next step
Critic
Action:  <MoveTo(2, 2)>
      
Score:  ….
Analysis: ......
Action
Draft Chain 
Mechanism
Actor-Critic 
Mechanism
Score≥Threshold?
Yes
No
Execute
 Actor's 
Action
Execute
 Critic's Action
Fig. 2. The workflow of LLM agents interacting with its environment. The
Chain of Speculation Mechanism and the Planner-Critic Mechanism are applied
within LLM-Cave. The Chain of Speculation maintains explicit hypotheses
about pit and Wumpus positions, updating them after each observation. The
Planner proposes an action that the Critic scores for safety; actions exceeding
a confidence threshold are executed otherwise a safer alternative is supplied.
A. Chain of Speculation Mechanism
The Chain of Speculation mechanism aims to provide LLM
agents with explicit reasoning memory across multiple interac-
tion rounds. While standard LLM agents implicitly access the
dialogue history (including past observations, previous actions,
or reasoning) through prompts, they often struggle to maintain
a structured and coherent understanding of the environmental
state over time. The Chain of Speculation addresses this limita-
tion by enabling the model to explicitly generate and propagate
a hypothesis (”draft”) regarding the environmental state at each
interaction step.
Concretely, the output of the LLM at each interaction
is structured into three distinct parts: Analysis (a reasoning
process based on current observations), Guess (the model’s
hypothesis or inference regarding the locations of Wumpus and
pits—explicitly formatted in JSON for clarity and ease of sub-
sequent processing), and Action (the decision based on these
hypotheses). For instance, upon perceiving a
"stench"
at
locations (1,2) and (2,1), the model’s Guess might be structured
as
"wumpus": [(2,2)], and the corresponding Action
could be ”<shootright> to ensure the absence of Wumpus
on the right side.” This Guess is then appended to the sub-
sequent observations, thus reminding the model of its current
inferences when it receives new information. Essentially, the
model declares its evolving beliefs explicitly, thereby construct-
ing and maintaining its own knowledge base.
To clearly illustrate, each interaction round follows the
procedure below:
• The agent receives the latest observations from the envi-
ronment (e.g., detecting a breeze or stench at its current

position).
• These new observations, along with the Guess from the
previous round (if available), are incorporated into the
prompt. The LLM then outputs a new Analysis, updated
Guess, and subsequent Action. The analysis represents
the model’s reasoning about the immediate environmental
cues, Guess encapsulates the agent’s updated beliefs about
possible Wumpus or pit locations, and Action is chosen
based on these updated beliefs.
• Newly generated Guesses are stored and passed to the
LLM with the next round of observations, thus forming a
continuous ”draft chain” throughout the task.
By iteratively updating its own assumptions, the intelligent
body gradually builds up a strong, long-term reasoning ability.
In this process, the Chain of Speculation mechanism plays
a role similar to that of ”internal memory,” which serves as
the internal state of the large language model. At the same
time, this mechanism also has the ability of self-correction
- when a new environmental observation conflicts with the
current speculation, the model will take the initiative to adjust
the original speculation in the following rounds and correct its
own cognitive bias step by step. In a sense, this stops the model
from ”starting from scratch” at every step and allows it to move
forward as it accumulates.
B. Planner-Critic Decision Mechanism
The Planner-Critic decision mechanism enhances decision-
making quality by introducing a ”second opinion” for each
proposed Action. In our framework, we pair the original
Planner LLM with a separate Critic LLM, enabling the Critic
to evaluate the actions suggested by the Planner.
Specifically, within this framework, the Planner is respon-
sible for proposing the next Action (leveraging information
maintained by the Chain of Speculation as described previ-
ously), while the Critic reviews and validates this Action prior
to execution. The detailed procedure per round is as follows:
• Given the current observation and continually updated
Guess, the Planner LLM performs an analysis and outputs
its Guess alongside a proposed Action (e.g., ”move to
position (2,1)” or ”pick up the gold”). This represents the
agent’s initial decision during the current interaction.
• The Critic LLM receives relevant context, including the
current observation and the Planner’s proposed Action.
The Critic then evaluates the Action’s safety and appro-
priateness. The Critic responds by assigning a confidence
score between 0 and 1 to the Planner’s proposed Action
and suggests an alternative action it believes would be
superior, if any.
• If the Critic assigns a high confidence score (exceeding
a predetermined threshold, such as 0.7) to the Planner’s
proposed Action, the original Action is executed. Con-
versely, if the confidence score falls below the threshold,
the alternative Action proposed by the Critic is chosen.
Subsequently, the environment returns the next observa-
tion.
The above Planner-Critic procedure is repeated in every
round. The threshold (set as 0.7 in our experiments) acts as a
hyperparameter balancing risk and efficiency—lower thresholds
indicate the Critic intervenes only when strongly opposing the
Planner’s choice, whereas higher thresholds prompt the Critic to
more frequently override the Planner to ensure safer outcomes.
It is important to note that the Planner and Critic can
either use the same underlying LLM with different prompts or
two entirely different models. For fairness and comparability,
our implementation uses the same model for both Planner
and Critic when evaluating a specific LLM. Thus, the Critic
essentially functions as an immediate validator.
The Planner-Critic mechanism significantly reduces the oc-
currence of overt mistakes. For example, if the Planner chooses
an action that could result in falling into a pit due to in-
sufficient reasoning, the Critic—armed with identical observa-
tional data but tasked specifically with critical assessment—can
identify this danger by interpreting clues such as ”breeze.”
Consequently, the Critic assigns a low confidence score to
this hazardous Action, thereby preventing its execution, and
instead suggests a safer alternative. Empirically, this process
substantially lowers the incidence of catastrophic failures (such
as agent deaths) in our experiments. Although the drawback
is an increased computational cost (as each step effectively
doubles model invocations), the enhanced safety and higher
success rates achieved through improved reasoning justify
this additional overhead in tasks where correct inference is
paramount.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We conducted a series of experiments in LLM-Cave to
evaluate the impact of mechanisms such as the Chain of Spec-
ulation and Planner-Critic on agent performance. LLM-Cave is
a classic grid-world environment that requires an agent to infer
the location of hidden dangers from partial information, making
it a suitable testbed for evaluating reasoning and decision-
making capabilities. The metrics used to measure performance
include the average total reward, success rate, and Wumpus kill
rate, the average number of steps the agent took to complete the
task and the average reward per step. In addition, we introduce
computational performance metrics, including average latency,
tokens, average cost, and tokens per second. Each experimental
configuration was run for 150 trials(3×3 board: zero pits one
wumpus, one pit zero wumpuses, one pit one wumpus; 4×4
board: one pit one wumpus, two pit one wumpus, three pit one
wumpus, with 25 trials per condition, each using a different
random seed) to ensure reliable statistics.
A. LLM-Cave
We have developed a text-based Wumpus World simulation
environment tailored for LLM-agent interaction. The environ-
ment consists of an n × n grid of rooms, consistent with the
classical definition of the Wumpus problem. Within this grid,
a single dangerous Wumpus and a number of bottomless pits
(ranging from 0 to 3 in our setup) are hidden, along with a
golden treasure placed in one of the rooms. The agent always

starts in the bottom-left room (1, 1), which, along with its two
adjacent rooms, is guaranteed safe. The primary objective for
the agent is to locate the gold while avoiding death.
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Grids
Explored 
Grids
To 
Explore
Gold
Agent
Wumpus
(Dangerous)
Pit
(Dangerous) 
Stench
(Safe)
Breeze
(Safe) 
Fig. 3. visualization of LLM-Cave.
To simplify decision-making, we allow the agent to move by
explicitly specifying the coordinates of an adjacent, unexplored
room (i.e., a cell adjacent to any previously explored room)
while remaining within grid boundaries. When the agent enters
a room containing the gold, it automatically collects the trea-
sure. Additionally, the agent possesses a single arrow, which
can be shot in a chosen direction; if the Wumpus is present
along that trajectory, it is killed (indicated by a scream), and
the agent earns bonus points. The task terminates either when
the agent successfully collects the gold (success) or when it
falls into a pit or is killed by the Wumpus (failure). Notably,
we do not require the agent to explicitly exit the cave after
collecting the gold—retrieving the treasure itself is considered
a success. However, since the gold may be unreachable due
to randomized layouts, the agent is permitted to perform an
”exit” action, which terminates the episode without incurring a
reward or penalty.
At each step, the environment provides textual perceptual
feedback describing the agent’s current sensory experience. We
implement standard Wumpus World signals: if any adjacent (up,
down, left, or right) cell contains a pit, a breeze is perceived;
if the Wumpus is nearby, the agent detects a stench; and if the
gold is present in the current room, the agent perceives a glitter.
We aggregate all prior perceptual feedback into a structured
JSON observation comprising eight fields:
• ’number of Wumpus’
• ’number of pit’
• ’Current Position’
• ’No breeze or stench is detected in
these locations’
• ’A breeze is detected in the following
locations’
• ’A stench is detected in the following
locations’
• ’When you have confirmed that the
corresponding locations are safe,
prioritize exploring these areas’:
suggestions for unexplored but adjacent rooms and
potential shooting actions (if the agent still has an arrow)
• ’The situation with the arrows’:
including
whether the arrow was fired, in what direction, and
whether a scream was heard
The agent must analyze this observation to infer the likely
locations of danger and the treasure. Crucially, the agent
never directly observes the precise positions of the pits or
the Wumpus. Instead, it must deduce such information from
indirect perceptual signals, requiring logical reasoning to avoid
hazards.
System Prompt
1. Introduction 
You are controlling an agent in a cave to find gold. 
There is one gold, some immobile Wumpus, and some pits. 
2. Valid Actions:
Move using <Moveto(x,y)>. 
You have one arrow to shoot the Wumpus using <ShootUP>, <ShootDown>, <ShootLeft>, or 
<ShootRight>. 
If you hit it, you’ll hear a scream and get a reward. 
Each action consumes stamina. Try to reach the gold using as few steps as possible. 
3. Game Mechanism
The game ends if you find the gold (win), fall into a pit, encounter the Wumpus, or choose 
<LeaveTheCave> (no reward, stamina is not refunded). 
Perceptions include: Safe Point (adjacent tiles are safe), Breeze (pit nearby), Stench (Wumpus nearby), 
and Scream (Wumpus was hit). 
For example, Breeze at (2,2) means a pit is in one of (1,2), (2,1), (3,2), or (2,3). 
4. Analysis:
You should analyze following aspects
(1) Nearby safe place: according to observed information, which position must be safe? 
(2) Nearby pits: according to observed 'Breeze', which position may be 'Pit'? 
(3) Nearby wumpus: according to observed 'Stench', which position may be 'Wumpus'? (if the 
'Wumpus' still alive)
5. Output:
You should output as:
Analysis:
(1) ......
(2) ......
Guess:
{"pit": [...], "wumpus": [...]}
Action: 
<ActionName>
note that Action should be one of the valid acitons <Moveto(x,y)>, <ShootUP>, <ShootDown>, 
<ShootLeft>, or <ShootRight>
Fig. 4. System prompt for LLMs.
To quantify agent performance, we adopt a reward structure
inspired by the traditional Wumpus World. Each episode begins
with a base score of 50 points. Every action (i.e., movement)
results in a minor penalty of −1 point, encouraging efficiency.
This penalty remains minor unless the agent performs many
redundant steps. Successfully acquiring the gold yields a bonus
of +50 points. Fatal outcomes—falling into a pit or being killed
by the Wumpus—result in penalties of −20 or −30 points,
respectively. Successfully killing the Wumpus with the arrow
earns +20 bonus points.
Each episode terminates upon success (gold collection),
failure (death), or exceeding the step limit (50 steps per episode
to prevent infinite loops). Thus, an ideal episode may achieve a
normalized score slightly above 100(if the Wumpus is killed),
while poor performance with extensive movement and eventual
death can result in negative scores.

(b) Agent begin to explore
(c) Keep exploring upwards until 
the edge of the map, during which 
time no dangers are detected
(d) Turning and 
exploring to the right, at 
(4, 4) feel the breeze
(e) Presumably (4, 3) has pit, 
so turn to explore (3, 3)
(f) Both breeze and stench are felt at 
(3,3), confirming the suspicion that 
there is a pit at (4,3), while choosing 
shootdown to secure the next step
(g) Hear scream (shoot the wumpus) 
and continue to explore down the road
(h) Successfully picked up the gold
(a) Initial state
Fig. 5.
A typical experiment replay. In LLM-Cave, the DeepSeek R1
model effectively guided the agent through a hazardous cave. Starting from
a safe region, the agent detected signs of danger—breeze and stench—and
inferred the locations of a pit and the Wumpus. It successfully avoided the
pit, eliminated the Wumpus, and proceeded to collect the gold, demonstrating
accurate reasoning and decision-making under uncertainty.
B. Effect of Chain of Speculation on o1-mini
We first applied the Chain of Speculation method on the
o1-mini model to evaluate its impact on performance.
Results indicate that introducing the Chain of Speculation
increased the success rate from 65.33% to 78.67% and raised
the average total reward from 72.13 to 82.16. The performance
variance also reduced (standard deviation from ±35.56 to
±29.02), demonstrating more stable behavior. Additionally, the
Wumpus kill rate rose from 19.33% to 22.00%. Although the
average number of steps taken slightly increased (from 4.87 to
5.17), the average reward per step also improved (from 23.44
to 24.34), suggesting better efficiency.
Regarding computational efficiency, introducing the Chain of
TABLE I
EFFECT OF CHAIN OF SPECULATION ON O1-MINI
o1-mini
o1-mini
Metric
(with only CoT)
(with CoSb)
Total Runs
150
150
Avg Total Reward
72.13 (±35.56)
82.16 (±29.02)
Avg Steps
4.87 (range: 1–14)
5.17 (range: 1–14)
Avg Reward per Step
23.44
24.34
Success Rate (%)a
65.33%
78.67%
Wumpus Kill Rate (%)
19.33%
22.00%
Avg Latency per Step (s)
32.43
36.88
Avg Total Tokens
3896.2
6631.7
Avg Cost per Step (USD)
0.0015
0.0025
aSuccess is defined as the agent successfully collecting the gold.
bCoS stands for Chain of Speculation.
Speculation resulted in an increase in computational overhead.
Specifically, the average latency per step increased from 32.43s
to 36.88s, average token usage per run rose substantially from
3896.2 to 6631.7 tokens, and correspondingly, the average cost
per step grew from 0.0015 to 0.0025 USD. This demonstrates
a clear tradeoff between improved inference performance and
increased computational resource requirements.
C. Application of Planner-Critic on 4o-mini
Next, we turned to the 4o-mini model. Because the 4o-
mini model lacks strong reasoning capabilities, the Chain of
Speculation method provided limited benefit. Therefore, we
introduced a Planner-Critic framework to further improve this
model’s performance.
TABLE II
EFFECT OF PLANNER-CRITIC ON 4O-MINI
4o-mini
4o-mini
Metric
(with only CoT)
(with Critic)
Total Runs
150
150
Avg Total Reward
54.31 (±38.05)
60.25 (±37.42)
Avg Steps
4.49 (range: 1–17)
4.22 (range: 1–13)
Avg Reward per Step
20.23
23.31
Success Rate (%)a
44.00%
50.67%
Wumpus Kill Rate (%)
3.33%
2.00%
Avg Latency per Step (s)
4.79
10.14
Avg Tokens per Run
3257.9
6256.0
Avg Cost per Step (USD)
0.0029
0.0054
aSuccess is defined as the agent successfully collecting the gold.
The Planner-Critic approach yields consistent performance
gains for 4o-mini: the success rate increased from 44.00% to
50.67%, the average total reward rose from 54.31 to 60.25,
and the average reward per step improved from 20.23 to 23.31
(approximately a 15% gain). Notably, introducing a Critic also
slightly reduced the average steps taken (from 4.49 to 4.22),
indicating the model became more efficient in achieving its
goals. Although the Wumpus kill rate dropped from 3.33%
to 2.00%, the overall increase in success rate suggests a net
improvement in performance.
In terms of computational efficiency, incorporating the Critic
agent resulted in higher resource consumption. Specifically,

the average latency per step more than doubled (from 4.79s
to 10.14s), token usage per run nearly doubled (from 3257.9
to 6256.0 tokens), and average cost per step increased corre-
spondingly (from 0.0029 to 0.0054 USD). These observations
demonstrate a clear performance-resource trade-off when inte-
grating the Critic into the planning process.
D. Baseline Performance of Mainstream Models
Finally, we evaluated the baseline performance of several
mainstream large models with no special mechanisms (no active
guessing, no Critic) to understand each model’s capability
under default conditions. Table 3 lists the average reward,
success rate, and Wumpus kill rate of five models in this base
setting.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT LLMS IN THE WUMPUS
ENVIRONMENT
Model
Avg Reward
Success Rate a
Wumpus Kill
(%)
Rate(%)
4o-mini
54.31 (±38.05)
44.00
3.33
o1-mini
72.13 (±35.56)
65.33
19.33
Gemini 2.5 Flash
74.73 (±34.30)
76.67
27.33
Claude 3.5
80.37 (±30.92)
78.00
28.67
Deepseek R1
81.31 (±26.56)
74.00
28.67
aSuccess is defined as the agent successfully collecting the gold.
As shown in Table 3, the more powerful models exhibit
superior and more stable performance across all metrics. For
example, Claude 3.5 and Deepseek R1 achieve average rewards
above 80, with success rates around 78% and 74%, respectively,
and Wumpus kill rates of approximately 29%, significantly
outperforming the other models. Gemini 2.5 Flash and o1-
mini attain intermediate performance, with success rates of
76.67% and 65.33%. In contrast, the smaller 4o-mini model
only achieves a 44.00% success rate and a 3.33% kill rate, and
its score varies widely between runs (standard deviation ±38.05,
much higher than those of the stronger models). Overall,
these findings indicate that the score of this environment can
effectively reflect the reasoning ability of the model.
TABLE IV
COMPUTATION EFFICIENCY METRICS OF DIFFERENT LLMS IN THE
WUMPUS ENVIRONMENT
Metric
4o-
mini
Claude
3.5
Deepseek
R1
Gemini
2.5 Flash
o1-
mini
Avg
Latency (s)
4.79
11.11
49.42
21.52
32.43
Tokens
Prompt
1940.6
2764.9
2144.3
2578.4
2130.1
Tokens
Completion
1317.3
2987.7
14027.0
38513.8
1766.1
Tokens
Total
3257.9
5752.6
16171.3
41092.2
3896.2
Avg
Cost (USD)
0.0029
0.0531
0.0147
0.0796
0.0015
TPSa
(tokens/s)
47.25
30.97
36.82
195.51
8.16
aTPS = Tokens per second.
In addition to task performance, computation efficiency
metrics (Table 4) provide further insights into practical trade-
offs among these models. Claude 3.5, despite its strong perfor-
mance, incurs significantly higher computational costs ($0.0531
per run) compared to other models, primarily due to a larger
average token usage (5752.6 tokens per run). In contrast,
models such as 4o-mini and o1-mini, although exhibiting lower
success rates, are markedly more economical ($0.0029 and
$0.0015 per run, respectively), reflecting their smaller size
and lower computational overhead. Gemini 2.5 Flash demon-
strates exceptionally high decoding speed, averaging 195.51
tokens per second (TPS), which significantly surpasses all other
tested models, highlighting its suitability for time-sensitive or
interactive applications. Conversely, o1-mini shows a notably
low TPS of 8.16, suggesting limited practical deployment in
latency-critical scenarios despite acceptable overall reasoning
ability. Deepseek R1 balances performance and cost relatively
effectively ($0.0147 per run), although its average latency
per step (49.42s) remains substantially higher than others,
indicating potential drawbacks in real-time use cases. Taken
together, these computational efficiency metrics complement
traditional accuracy metrics and provide another perspective
on the performance of large models.
VI. DISCUSSION
Our experiments demonstrate that the LLM-Cave environ-
ment is effective in evaluating the multi-step reasoning ca-
pabilities of large language models. The effectiveness of the
reasoning enhancement strategy depends on the underlying
reasoning strength of the model. For example, o1-mini benefits
greatly from “Chain of Speculation” (CoS), with an increase in
success rate of about 13% and an increase in average score of
10 points. This suggests that the CoS mechanism can leverage
explicit reasoning structures to optimize decision making.
In contrast, the weaker 4o-mini model gains less from
CoS due to the inaccuracy of the initial guess propagation.
Instead, it benefits more significantly from the Planner-Critic
mechanism, which improves the success rate by about 6.7% and
the average score by 6 points by directly optimizing decisions
and correcting errors. Thus, stronger models can maximize their
potential through CoS, while weaker models can gain more
from “planner-critic”, although they are still constrained by
their inherent limitations.
In terms of computational efficiency, both strategies incur
additional resource overheads, including increased latency and
token usage, which is particularly noticeable in the weaker
models employing Planner-Critic. However, the substantial
performance gains justify these incremental costs, making these
strategies a worthwhile investment for tasks requiring higher
accuracy and optimized decision making.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have developed LLM-Cave, a novel benchmark frame-
work specifically designed to evaluate and enhance the reason-
ing and decision-making capabilities of Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs). In our experiments, we introduced complementary

inference, the Chain of Speculation prompting technique and an
LLM-based Planner-Critic feedback framework. Experimental
results indicate that explicitly integrating structured reason-
ing processes, whether through chain-of-thought prompting
or evaluative feedback mechanisms, significantly helps LLMs
achieve more accurate, reward-maximizing outcomes in multi-
step reasoning scenarios. The computational cost associated
with these strategies, while noticeable, remains a worthwhile
trade-off given the observed performance gains. Looking for-
ward, integrating inference-time reasoning strategies (such as
Chain of Speculation and Planner-Critic) with training-time
feedback or fine-tuning (e.g., incorporating Critic feedback
into reinforcement learning or supervised fine-tuning) offers a
promising path toward enhancing autonomy and reliability in
complex reasoning tasks.
REFERENCES
[1] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian
Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, Denny Zhou
Chain-of-Thought
Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
[2] Xu, X., Li, Z., Lu, C., Qi, R., Ni, Y., Jiang, L., Liu, X., Zhang, X., Fang,
Y., Huang, et al., Li, Z. Reflection of Episodes: Learning to Play Game
from Expert and Self Experiences arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13388, 2025.
[3] Hua, W., Liu, O., Li, L., Amayuelas, A., Chen, J., Jiang, L., Jin, M., Fan,
L., Sun, F., Wang, W., et al., Zhang, Y. Game-Theoretic LLM: Agent
Workflow for Negotiation Games.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05990,
2024.
[4] Xiao, Y., Sun, E., et al., Wang, W. TradingAgents: Multi-Agents LLM
Financial Trading Framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20138, 2024.
[5] D. Shah, B. Osi´nski, S. Levine. LM-Nav: Robotic Navigation with Large
Pre-Trained Models of Language, Vision, and Action. In Conference on
Robot Learning, pages 492–504, March 2023.
[6] P. Doma, A. Arab, X. Xiao.
LLM-Enhanced Path Planning: Safe
and Efficient Autonomous Navigation with Instructional Inputs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.02655, 2024.
[7] Dorbala, V. S., Mullen, et al.,Manocha, D.
Can an Embodied Agent
Find Your “Cat-Shaped Mug”? LLM-Based Zero-Shot Object Navigation.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 4083–4090,
2023.
[8] Jin, Y., Li, D., Shi, J., Hao, P., Sun, F.,et al., Fang, B. RobotGPT: Robot
Manipulation Learning From ChatGPT. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2543–2550, 2024.
[9] Liu, H., Zhu, Y., Kato, K., Tsukahara, A., Kondo, I., et al., Hasegawa, Y.
Enhancing the LLM-Based Robot Manipulation Through Human-Robot
Collaboration. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[10] Ma, W., Mi, Q., Zeng, Y., Yan, X., Wu, Y., Lin, R., et al., Wang, J.
Large Language Models Play StarCraft II: Benchmarks and a Chain of
Summarization Approach. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 37, pages 133386–133442, 2024.
[11] Li, Z., Ni, Y., Qi, R., Jiang, L., Lu, C., Xu, X., et al. Zhang, X. LLM-
PySC2: Starcraft II learning environment for Large Language Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05348. 2024.
[12] Park, J. S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C. J., Morris, M. R., et al., Bernstein,
M. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, pages 1–22, October 2023.
[13] Qian, C., Liu, W., Liu, H., Chen, N., Dang, Y., Li, J., Yang, C., Chen, W.,
Su, Y., Cong, X., Xu, J.,et al., Sun, M. ChatDev: Communicative Agents
for Software Development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.
[14] Tan, W., Ding, Z., Zhang, W., Li, B., Zhou, B., Yue, J., Xia, H., Jiang,
J., Zheng, L., Xu, X., Bi, Y., Gu, P., Wang, X., Karlsson, B. F., An, B.,et
al., Lu, Z. Towards General Computer Control: A Multimodal Agent for
Red Dead Redemption II as a Case Study. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on
Large Language Model (LLM) Agents, January 2024.
[15] Feng, Y., Wang, Y., et al., Lu, Z. Llama rider: Spurring large language
models to explore the open world.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08922,
2023.
[16] Shao, X., Jiang, W., et al.,Liu, M. SwarmBrain: Embodied Agent for
Real-Time Strategy Game StarCraft II via Large Language Models. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17749, 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
17749.
[17] Silei Xu, Wenhao Xie, Lingxiao Zhao, Pengcheng He Chain of Draft:
Thinking Faster by Writing Less. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18600, 2025.
[18] Guanting Dong, Yifei Chen, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Hongjin Qian, Yutao
Zhu, Hangyu Mao, Guorui Zhou, Zhicheng Dou, Ji-Rong Wen
Tool-
Star: Empowering LLM-Brained Multi-Tool Reasoner via Reinforcement
Learning arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16410, 2025.
