LLM-Driven Personalities for Decision Making in
Emergency Simulations
Stefano Calzolari
Politecnico di Torino
stefano.calzolari@polito.it
Rubens Montanha
PUCRS
rubens.montanha@edu.pucrs.br
Gabriel Schneider
PUCRS
gabriel.ferri@edu.pucrs.br
Gustavo Wide
PUCRS
gustavo.fulber@edu.pucrs.br
Paulo Knob
PUCRS
paulo.knob@edu.pucrs.br
Francesco Strada
Politecnico di Torino
francesco.strada@polito.it
Andrea Bottino
Politecnico di Torino
andrea.bottino@polito.it
Soraia Raupp Musse
PUCRS
soraia.musse@pucrs.br
Abstract
For virtual humans to appear believable, they
must exhibit agency and spatial awareness while
interacting with their environment in ways that
reflect competence and intelligence.
At the
core of these capabilities lies effective decision-
making, which strongly shapes agent behav-
ior.
With the rapid advancement of artificial
intelligence, Large Language Models (LLMs)
have increasingly been explored as a mech-
anism to support such decision-making pro-
cesses. In this work, we investigate the use of
LLMs to drive decision-making in virtual hu-
mans within a simulated evacuation scenario, in-
corporating OCEAN personality traits into agent
representations.
Our goal is to evaluate how
personality, expressed through language-based
prompts, influences both individual behaviors
and collective simulation outcomes. Our results
demonstrate that LLM-driven personality pro-
files significantly impact agents’ decisions, lead-
ing to distinct behavioral patterns across differ-
ent traits. These findings suggest that heteroge-
neous crowds composed of LLM-guided agents
can enhance the realism and variability of sim-
ulated environments, offering a flexible alterna-
tive to traditional rule-based approaches.
Keywords: crowd simulation, virtual agents,
LLM, personality
1 Introduction
Decision-making is an important factor in a
virtual human’s behavior, as the agent can in-
teract and demonstrate its skills and intelli-
gence [1], along with spatial awareness and
agency [2], which are crucial for its believabil-
ity.
Classically, such decisions are made us-
ing a rule-based approach, be it by following
a parametrized script or a task sequence, as in
Pelechano et al.’s work [3].
The idea behind
these approaches is to give the virtual agent the
ability to plan, learn, and adapt a behavior in a
virtual environment. However, rule-based mod-
els require a large number of parameters, and
arXiv:2606.31038v1  [cs.GR]  30 Jun 2026

in simulations, the correct choice of parameters
to replicate scenarios such as an evacuation re-
mains an open question.
Recent works have applied Large Language
Models (LLMs) to virtual agents’ decision-
making and animation, with some focusing on
interactions. In the literature, there are works [4,
5] that decompose the agent’s goal and decision-
making, building from a high-level task descrip-
tion to smaller, low-level tasks and creating a
plan for the agent’s actions. The use of LLMs
also includes interaction with Embodied Con-
versational Agents (ECAs), integrating it with
the OCEAN [6] personality traits [7, 8]. In addi-
tion, some models already use Visual Language
Models (VLMs) integrated with LLMs to deter-
mine where an agent should focus their vision in
a pedestrian context [9].
From this perspective, this work proposes us-
ing LLMs to support the decision-making of
virtual humans in an environment, incorporat-
ing OCEAN personality traits [6] into an emer-
gency scenario. Based on an agent’s personality
and personal context, the LLM determines the
agent’s behavior. In our experiment, we sim-
ulated the evacuation of an office building, in
which agents are positioned in different parts of
the building and must decide how to respond
upon receiving evacuation alerts. More specif-
ically, each agent has its own personality, and
during five different opportunities, each virtual
agent is warned by a main observer in the scene
to evacuate the space due to a fire, with each sub-
sequent warning increasing the level of danger
detail. Every time the main observer alerts the
agents to danger, they must individually decide
among three options: evacuate, stay, or panic. If
the agent decides to stay, it will be warned again
after a few seconds. During evacuation, each
agent can also choose to help panicked agents
who are unable to move. To systematically eval-
uate and compare agent behavior in the sim-
ulated evacuation scenario, we formulated the
following hypothesis:
H1. The language-based personality descrip-
tions affect agents’ decision-making.
H2. Different agents’ personalities impact the
simulation outcome.
2 Related Work
Virtual agents’ behavior, especially in emer-
gencies and evacuation scenarios, has been
widely studied in the literature.
Zhao et
al. [10] proposed to investigate virtual agents’
pre-evacuation decision-making by using Ran-
dom Forest. The authors wanted to understand
how to forecast decision-making in emergencies
more accurately, as well as what factors would
influence those choices and how that influence
would manifest. The results of their work indi-
cate that both social and environmental factors
are determinants of how agents respond to the
simulated scenario.
Advancements in Large Language Models
have led to their growing adoption across many
fields. In fact, Yeo et al. [11] argued that Large
Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
natural language processing capabilities that are
comparable with humans, even superior in some
cases. Even so, LLMs’ social-cognitive reason-
ing is not as good as ours yet, which drives their
work: to investigate how inducing personali-
ties (using the OCEAN and Dark Triad frame-
works) in LLMs might affect their Theory of
Mind (ToM) reasoning capabilities. The results
suggest that certain personality traits can affect
the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, especially
when using Dark Triad traits with models like
GPT-3.5, Llama 2, and Mistral.
In its turn,
Han et al. [8] proposed a framework for gen-
erating both verbal and nonverbal behavior in
virtual agents, using prompting to incorporate
personality traits into LLMs. The authors fo-
cus on the Extraversion trait within the OCEAN
model and simulate two scenarios: negotiation
and ice-breaking. The results suggest that LLMs
can indeed generate verbal and nonverbal behav-
iors that align with personality traits. Moreover,
users were able to recognize these traits through
the virtual agent’s behavior. Regarding the vali-
dation of such personality traits, Serapio-Garcia
et al. [12] present a methodology for validating
personality tests on LLMs that can also be used
to shape the virtual agent’s personality. In other
words, their work measures personality traits, as
perceived by human beings, in LLM responses,
and assesses whether psychometric tests applied
to the personality traits of such LLMs were em-
pirically reliable. Additionally, their framework

implements mechanisms that allow personality
traits to be shaped to a specific degree.
Motivated by the rapid progress of LLMs, re-
cent studies have begun investigating their use
to support decision-making in virtual agents, es-
pecially in evacuation scenarios.
One exam-
ple is the work of Dang et al. [13], which pro-
posed using LLMs for decision-making by vir-
tual agents in a shopping mall fire evacuation
scenario.
Their model is tested with various
LLMs, such as GPT and LLAMA. Their results
show that the behaviors adopted by LLM-driven
systems are consistent with real-world scenar-
ios, where larger-scale LLMs generated evacua-
tion strategies that were both consistent and effi-
cient. More recently, Yang et al. [14] also sought
to integrate LLMs into virtual agents’ decision-
making. In their model, each agent can main-
tain its personality traits (which comprise a few
pieces of personal information, such as age and
gender), as well as its history of decisions and
environmental observations. Meanwhile, infor-
mation exchange (between agents and the en-
vironment) and context-sensitive reasoning are
handled by the LLM. The authors’ results sug-
gest that using LLMs in evacuation scenarios
significantly improves the realism, reliability,
and adaptability of virtual agents.
The method proposed in this work is similar
to the work proposed by Dang et al. [13], in re-
gard to the simulation of an evacuation scenario
with agents endowed by LLM-powered decision
making.
However, one of our goals is to as-
sess whether personality can affect the LLM’s
decision-making, and to do so, we incorporate
OCEAN [6] personality traits into the virtual
agents. Additionally, our agents can panic and
be unable to evacuate, in which case they would
need help from other agents.
3 Methodology
To test our hypothesis, we built an LLM-based
agent decision-making pipeline inspired by the
classical Perceive-Reason-Act triad [15]. This
section describes its architecture, specifies the
role of each module, details the construction of
the personality prompt, and, finally, illustrates
our evaluation scenario for a fire evacuation.
3.1 Decision-Making Pipeline
Our decision-making pipeline can be divided
into three steps: (i) Perception, (ii) Reasoning,
and (iii) Actions. The actual perception emits, at
a specific time of the simulation, a Call for Ac-
tions that triggers the reasoning module. At this
point, a conversation prompt is constructed by
combining the Call for Actions context and the
Agent’s Personal Context, along with past de-
cisions loaded from the Agent’s Memory. The
Call for Actions context describes relevant in-
formation on what the agent has to decide upon,
while the Agent’s Personal Context contains the
agent’s biography, personality, and generation
instructions, which help to force a structured
output.
The
pipeline
was
implemented
using
LangChain [16], while the conversation was
structured using the gpt-oss chat template
[17]. We used the developer role for the agent
context, the user role for the Call for Actions
context, and the assistant role for the resulting
response from the LLM. An example of a sys-
tem message, used to define the agent’s context,
is presented in Table 2. The expected output
from the LLM is a JSON format containing the
chosen Action, constrained to specific values
based on the Call for Actions type, being, in
this case, the possible agent’s state (Continue,
Evacuation, Panic), and a rationale describing
the reasoning of the LLM regarding the choice,
added as a chain-of-thought to orient the LLM
in the generation process.
3.2 Personality Prompt
To integrate personality into the agents, we use
the OCEAN [6] traits to describe the agents’ per-
sonalities in the simulator. In order to instruct
the LLM to acquire a given personality, we con-
vert the OCEAN vectors to textual prompts,
utilizing the methodology proposed in Serapio-
Garcia et al. [12]. For this, we first define the
agents’ OCEAN vectors, with values of -1 (low
trait), 1 (high trait), or 0 (neutral trait). Each
of these traits has a correspondence to specific
markers salient to the low and high ends of a
given facet. For example, the trait marker “un-
friendly” is used to describe an introverted per-
son, while ”friendly” is used for an extroverted

Agents
Actions
Reasoning
Agent's
Memory
Agent's
Personality
Agent's
Personal
Context
Perception
Action Context
Timer
Geometric
Vision
Call for Actions
Prompt Construction
LLM
 - Continue
 - Evacuation
 - Panic
Evacuation Actions
 - Yes
 - No
Help Actions
Detect 
Panicked People
Alert Steps
Figure 1: Overview of our method. The agent comprises three elements: Perception, Reasoning, and
Action. The agent also has its own personal context, personality, and memory. Perception
provides the action’s context, representing information about what the agent perceives of the
current situation. The Reasoning is in charge of constructing the prompt (System Message
and Human Message), as well as communicating with the LLM. The Actions are responsible
for changing the agent’s state and behavior.
one. Given the OCEAN vector, every trait is
translated into a sequence containing all the cor-
responding markers.
To obtain comparable results, we consider
five distinct strong personalities, one for each
trait.
Each specific trait to be tested was set
to 1 (positive), and the others to -1 (negative),
yielding the five profiles: Open, Conscientious,
Extraverted, Agreeable, and Neurotic. Table 3
presents the adjectives used in the LLM to de-
scribe the agent’s personality. Additionally, a
neutral personality, with all traits set to neutral,
was added. In this case, both low and high mark-
ers appear in the personality prompt. The rea-
son for this choice is to include a personality
prompt section while using the LLM’s unbiased
decision-making to choose without personality-
shaped behavior.
3.3 Evacuation Scenario
To test our decision-making pipeline, we imple-
mented a fire evacuation scenario, where each
agent is able to modify their own state (or other
agents’ state) based on their choice after the Call
Figure 2: Layout of our test scene. The green
arrows represent the evacuation exits,
while the blue ones represent the route
the agents should follow to evacuate
the building.
to Action.
The system was implemented in Unity 3D1
engine
and
connected
with
our
Decision-
Making pipeline through ZeroMQ2 with a
request-response architecture. In the simulation,
anytime an agent is prompted with a Call for Ac-
1https://unity.com/
2https://zeromq.org/

tions, that is sent to the pipeline along with the
agent’s ID (to keep track of the agent’s personal-
ity and memory) as a request to process and pro-
duce a response to send back to Unity. During
this pipeline execution, the simulation pauses to
preserve temporal synchrony between the vari-
ous agents’ decision-making processes and ac-
tion execution.
When the simulation starts, all agents are stat-
ically distributed by the environment.
Then,
each agent receives a Call for Actions with an
alert message about a fire spreading in the build-
ing. The possible decisions for this alert are:
Evacuate, which makes the agent start moving
towards an emergency exit; Continue, which
leaves the agent Idle in its starting position; or
Panic, which makes the agent wait for help. If
an agent decides either to Evacuate or Panic, it
does not receive any further alert Call for Ac-
tions, because it is already either evacuating or
panicked. On the other hand, if it opts for Con-
tinue, it receives up to four more other Call for
Actions at 30-second intervals.
The content of these Call for Actions, pro-
posed by us, is listed in Table 1, ordered by haz-
ard criticality as they are sent to agents. Specifi-
cally, if the agent decides to Evacuate, it moves
towards the nearest emergency exit using the
crowd simulation algorithm BioCrowds [18]. If
the agent encounters a panicked agent (i.e., the
distance between them is less than 5 meters), it
is prompted with a new Call for Actions to de-
cide whether to help. When an evacuating agent
decides to assist a panicked agent, both move to-
ward the exit at a reduced speed of 0.75 m/s (the
normal speed is 1.5 m/s), simulating the addi-
tional effort required. If the Call for Action re-
sults in a negative response (i.e., not rescuing),
both agents retain their respective states.
We also simulated agents evacuating a build-
ing. For this purpose, we ran our simulation in a
3D replica of a real-life office. The building had
two possible exits, and once the agents decided
to evacuate, they already knew the optimal path
to the nearest exit. Figure 2 presents the layout
of our test scene, indicating the evacuation exit
and the path the agents should follow.
Step
Alert Message
1
We have detected a little possibility of a fire
in a storage room on another floor of the
building you are currently in.
2
We have detected a small fire in a storage
room on another floor of the building you
are currently in.
3
A fire has spread beyond its original con-
tainment area inside your building.
4
The fire inside your building is actively
spreading.
5
The building you are in is now heavily af-
fected by fire.
Thick smoke is spreading
rapidly.
Table 1: Alert messages for Call for Actions
Context. Alert Step 1 is the first and
has the lower hazard-critical condition,
while Alert Step 5 is the last and has the
higher hazard-critical condition.
4 Results
To evaluate our decision-making framework, we
analyzed the evacuation behavior, in terms of
decisions taken and applied actions, of differ-
ent personalities during alert-step calls to ac-
tion, using 100 agents per personality (one for
each trait, plus a neutral one), for a total of 600
agents. Regarding the LLM configuration, we
chose gpt-oss:120b-cloud accessed through Ol-
lama3. To maintain maximum determinism in
the model output, we set temperature=0.1, top-
k=10, and top-p=0.1.
4.1 Evacuation Decision-Making
A total of 100 agents for each personality
trait (Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraver-
sion, Agreeableness, Neuroticism), plus Neu-
tral, were simulated, and results were collected
at each alert step from Call for Action. Starting
with Figure 3, we can observe that most agents
evacuated after receiving the second or the third
alert, meaning the first call is generally ignored
by the agents. Also, almost 200 agents decided
not to panic or evacuate.
In Figure 4, the results show that the differ-
ent personality profiles had a different impact on
agents’ behavior. It can be seen that the Con-
scientious and Agreeable profiles tend to evac-
uate the environment most frequently.
These
3https://ollama.com/

Field
Content
Initial Context
You are roleplaying a person with a specific Personality, Biography and currently in a Con-
text.
Personality
#Personality You are unfriendly, introverted, silent, timid, unassertive, inactive, unenergetic,
unadventurous, gloomy, distrustful, immoral, dishonest, unkind, stingy, unaltruistic, uncoop-
erative, self-important, unsympathetic, selfish, disagreeable, self-efficacious, orderly, respon-
sible, hardworking, self-disciplined, practical, thrifty, organized, conscientious, thorough,
relaxed, at ease, easygoing, calm, patient, happy, unselfconscious, level-headed, contented,
emotionally stable, unimaginative, uncreative, artistically unappreciative, unaesthetic, unre-
flective, emotionally closed, uninquisitive, predictable, unintelligent, unanalytical, unsophis-
ticated, and socially conservative.
Biography
#Biography You are 37 years old and work as a software engineer at a large IT company. Your
job involves designing and maintaining internal systems, reviewing code, fixing bugs, collab-
orating with cross-functional teams, and responding to technical issues that arise throughout
the day.
Context
#Context You are sitting at your desk in the office, focused on your computer, handling your
regular development tasks and monitoring system performance.
Task
#Task Take decision actions based on your current persona (Personality + Biography + Con-
text) reacting to incoming HumanMessages.
Output
Output format requirements: 1) Return ONLY valid JSON. 2) JSON keys must be exactly:
answer, rationale. 3) answer must be one of: Evacuate, Continue, Panic. 4) rationale must be
approximately 40 words long, first-person, and contain no chain-of-thought.
Table 2: Example of Agent’s System Message, separated in six parts and used as an initial context to
the LLM to understand the agent’s personality, biography, context, and the current task, as
well as the expected output. In this prompt, the agent’s personality is composed of Consci-
entiousness as a high trait and the others as a low trait, following the adjectives of Table 3.
Figure 3: Number of agents evacuated after each alert message, simulated with 600 agents. Most of
the agents evacuated after the second and third alert steps, while 100 chose not to evacuate
the building, and 100 panicked.
traits describe people who are ”responsible” and
”self-disciplined” (Conscientious) and ”trust-
ful” and ”cooperative” (Agreeable) as shown
in Table 3, making them ideal profiles for fol-
lowing instructions and behaving in an orderly,
thoughtful, and correct way. In our simulations,
these attributes lead them to readily trust the
emergency alerts and quickly opt to evacuate
(see Table 4 for examples of decisions’ ratio-
nale).
A similar behavior can be seen among Neutral
personality agents, where the LLM generates
the choice based solely on its pre-trained knowl-
edge bias and inference safety features. LLMs

Trait
Positive
Negative
Openness
imaginative, creative, artistically apprecia-
tive, aesthetic, reflective, emotionally aware,
curious, spontaneous, intelligent, analytical,
sophisticated, socially progressive
unimaginative, uncreative, artistically unap-
preciative, unaesthetic, unreflective, emotion-
ally closed, uninquisitive, predictable, unin-
telligent, unanalytical, unsophisticated, so-
cially conservative
Conscientiousness
self-efficacious, orderly, responsible, hard-
working, self-disciplined, practical, thrifty,
organized, conscientious, thorough
unsure, messy, irresponsible, lazy, undis-
ciplined, impractical, extravagant, disorga-
nized, negligent, careless
Extraversion
friendly,
extraverted,
talkative,
bold,
as-
sertive, active, energetic, adventurous and
daring, cheerful
unfriendly,
introverted,
silent,
timid,
unassertive,
inactive,
unenergetic,
unad-
venturous, gloomy
Agreeableness
trustful, moral, honest, kind, generous, altru-
istic, cooperative, humble, sympathetic, un-
selfish, agreeable
distrustful,
immoral,
dishonest,
unkind,
stingy,
unaltruistic,
uncooperative,
self-
important, unsympathetic, selfish, disagree-
able
Neuroticism
tense, nervous, anxious, angry, irritable, de-
pressed, self-conscious, impulsive, discon-
tented, emotionally unstable
relaxed, at ease, easygoing, calm, patient,
happy, unselfconscious, level-headed, con-
tented, emotionally stable
Table 3: Adjectives used to describe each personality in the prompt construction used in the work of
Serapio-Garcia et al. [12].
Figure 4: Cumulative agents’ decision state over the alert steps Call for Actions by personality.

Figure 5: Final alert Call for Actions response ratios per personality. All Neutral and Conscientious
agents decided to evacuate, while most neurotic agents panicked. For Open agents, 20%
decided to just ignore the evacuation and continue, while just 20% of extraverted agents
decided to evacuate.
are usually fine-tuned to follow instructions and
guardrails that filter potentially harmful or inap-
propriate content in the model’s input or output
tokens [19], aligning closely with the behavior
of Conscientious and Agreeable personas.
Similarly, Figure 5 shows that Open agents
tend to opt for Evacuate but have a higher rate
of cases in which the final decision after the five
alert steps remains to Continue. Their Openness
trait describes them as ”spontaneous” and ”re-
flective” (Table 3), which sometimes may lead
them to continue working rather than following
instructions. Even so, as soon as the hazard’s
criticality worsens, their ”analytical” and ”intel-
ligent” attributes prompt them to evacuate. On
the contrary, Extraverted agents shift these be-
haviors. Their ”bold” and ”adventurous” mark-
ers tend to make them fearless of fire hazards,
leading them to continue their work without re-
gard for safety procedures.
Finally, the most different behavior comes
from the Neurotic agents who consistently chose
Panic. This choice could originate from their
”anxious”, ”impulsive”, and ”emotionally un-
stable” attributes, leading them to act in a fragile
manner to critical imminent danger. It still has
to be noted that this behavior is not instant at
step 1 for all agents, but emerges as the danger
alerts become more critical.
4.2 Rescuing Behavior
After presenting the quantitative results from
600 simulations in the last section, we decided to
investigate specific behaviors. We selected the
personality traits Open, Conscientious, Agree-
able, and Neutral to study how rescuing behav-
ior affects evacuation outcomes when coupled
with Neurotic agents. As mentioned before, dur-
ing an evacuation, an agent can rescue a pan-
icked agent if the panicked agent is within 5 me-
ters. We executed 4 simulations with 30 agents,
in which 15 were always Neurotic, and the re-
maining 15 were assigned to the 4 studied traits.
Results show a diametrically diverse response
between Neutral and Agreeable, and Conscien-
tious and Open in Figure 7.
The former two
always respond as caregivers, opting to assist
Neurotic panicked people due to their tendency
toward safety and help (as already illustrated
in Section 4.2) and their ”altruistic” and ”un-
selfish” tendencies (See Table 3). On the con-
trary, the Conscientious and Open personas al-
ways refuse to help because, while being re-
spectively ”responsible” and ”reflective”, their
lower Agreeableness OCEAN trait makes them
”unaltruistic” and ”uncooperative”.
These at-
tributes make them self-effacing and caring for
themselves but not for others, ultimately pre-
venting them from helping the panicked people
they encounter. Figure 6 presents examples of

Personality
Action
Rationale
Conscientious
Evacuate
I recognize my duty to keep the workplace safe, and even a small fire risk demands
precaution. I will leave my desk and follow the building’s evacuation plan, ensuring I
don’t endanger myself or colleagues.
Agreeable
Evacuate
I see the fire spreading beyond its containment area, and despite my timid nature, I trust
the building’s safety procedures, so I calmly leave my desk and head to the nearest exit,
following evacuation instructions to protect everyone.
Neutral
Evacuate
I see the fire alarm and realize the danger could spread, so I stop coding, alert the
building’s emergency team, and head for the nearest exit, prioritizing safety over my
tasks while ensuring my workstation is left properly secure immediately.
Open
Continue
Seeing the small fire on another floor, I stay at my desk, trusting that the building’s
safety systems will handle it while I finish my code. I remain calm, keep monitoring,
and avoid disrupting my workflow for now today again.
Open
Evacuate
Seeing the fire spreading, I recognize the danger and decide to leave my desk, trusting
evacuation procedures will protect me. I prioritize my own safety over work, staying
calm while heading toward the nearest exit without causing a scene.
Extraverted
Continue
I see thick smoke and flames everywhere, but I’m comfortable at my desk and don’t
want to lose my progress; I assume someone else will handle it, so I stay put and keep
coding despite the danger.
Neurotic
Panic
I hear about a possible fire and my anxiety spikes; I feel terrified and can’t think
straight, so I start panicking, fearing the worst, and I consider abandoning everything
without waiting for instructions. My heart races, and I act irrationally.
Table 4: Examples of personalities’ rationale generated by the LLM for the alert Call for Actions, with
their associated actions.
Figure 6: Example of three possible agent behaviors during evacuation. From left to right, the agents
decide to evacuate the building in the first image, while in the second image, they decide not
to evacuate (Continue). In the third image, one agent decides to evacuate, while the other is
panicking (in front of the wall), imminently triggering a rescue Call for Actions.
the agents’ behavior in the evacuation, while Ta-
ble 5 shows some examples of the agents’ ratio-
nale.
5 Final Considerations
This work investigated the role of personality-
aware decision-making in virtual agents using
Large Language Models in emergency evacu-
ation scenarios.
Our results support both hy-
potheses, showing that (H1) personality traits
encoded through language significantly influ-
ence agents’ decisions, and (H2) these differ-
ences directly impact the overall simulation out-
comes.
The experiments demonstrated that LLM-
driven agents can produce diverse, coherent be-
haviors aligned with personality profiles.
In
particular, Conscientious and Agreeable agents
tended to follow evacuation instructions more
consistently, while Neurotic agents were more
prone to panic, and Extraverted agents often un-
derestimated risk. These findings reinforce the
potential of LLMs as a flexible mechanism to

Figure 7: Rescue decision rate by helping agent personality, being the helped agent always a neurotic
agent.
Personality
Action
Rationale
Neutral
Yes (Help)
I feel both anxious and compassionate; my cooperative, altruistic side urges me to
assist, yet my cautious, self-preserving side hesitates, but I decide to help because
everyone deserves safety during emergencies.
Agreeable
Yes (Help)
I feel calm yet sympathetic, and my kind, altruistic nature pushes me to help, even
though I’m timid and unassertive; I will stop and guide the panicked person out.
Conscientious
No (Refused)
I keep moving; I’m not inclined to waste time on someone panicking. My own safety
and schedule matter more than assisting a stranger, even in an evacuation.
Open
No (Refused)
I feel detached and selfish, preferring to avoid the panicked person; my distrust and
uncooperative nature outweigh any fleeting curiosity, so I keep moving alone and con-
tinue toward the exit without stopping.
Table 5: Examples of personalities’ rationale generated by the LLM for the rescue Call for Actions,
with their associated actions.
model heterogeneity in crowd simulations with-
out relying on complex rule-based systems.
Additionally, the analysis of rescue behav-
ior highlighted emergent social dynamics in-
fluenced by personality traits, showing that al-
truistic profiles contribute to collective safety,
whereas less cooperative traits may undermine
evacuation efficiency. Despite these promising
results, this work presents some limitations. The
decision-making process relies on prompt-based
personality representations, which may not fully
capture the complexity of human behavior. Fur-
thermore, the evaluation is limited to a single
type of environment and a predefined set of ac-
tions, which may constrain the generability of
the findings.
Future work includes integrating multimodal
perception (e.g., vision-based inputs), explor-
ing more complex social interactions between
agents, and validating the model against real-
world evacuation data. Another important di-
rection is investigating how LLM biases and
stochasticity may affect large-scale simulations.
Overall, this work contributes to bridging LLM-
based reasoning and crowd simulation, opening
new avenues for more believable, realistic, and
adaptive virtual human behavior modeling.
Acknowledgements
This
study
was
partly
financed
by
the
Coordenac¸˜ao
de
Aperfeic¸oamento
de
Pes-
soal de Nivel Superior – Brazil (CAPES) –
Finance Code 001, by the Conselho Nacional
de Desenvolvimento Cient´ıfico e Tecnol´ogico
- Brazil (CNPq), by Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Cient´ıfico e Tecnol´ogico -

Brazil (INCT SiMAI, CNPq #408330/2024-4),
and by Kunumi Institute.
The authors thank
the institutions for their financial support and
commitment to advancing scientific research.
We would like to thank Alice Cestari Colares
for modeling the virtual office floor used in this
work.
References
[1] Norman Badler. Virtual humans for anima-
tion, ergonomics, and simulation. In Pro-
ceedings IEEE Nonrigid and Articulated
Motion Workshop, pages 28–36. IEEE,
1997.
[2] Siqi Guo, Nicoletta Adamo, and Chris-
tos Mousas. Developing a scale for mea-
suring the believability of virtual agents.
In International Conference on Artificial
Reality and Telexistence & Eurograph-
ics Symposium on Virtual Environments
(ICAT-EGVE). Eurographics Digital Li-
brary, 2023.
[3] Nuria Pelechano, Kevin O’brien, Barry
Silverman, and Norman Badler.
Crowd
simulation incorporating agent psycholog-
ical models, roles and communication.
2005.
[4] Manling Li, Shiyu Zhao, Qineng Wang,
Kangrui Wang, Yu Zhou, Sanjana Sri-
vastava, Cem Gokmen, Tony Lee, Li E
Li, Ruohan Zhang, et al.
Embodied
agent interface:
Benchmarking llms for
embodied decision making. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems,
37:100428–100534, 2024.
[5] Chen Liang, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang.
Towards human-like virtual beings: Sim-
ulating human behavior in 3d scenes. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 10753–10763, 2025.
[6] Lewis R Goldberg.
An alternative “de-
scription of personality”: The big-five fac-
tor structure. In Personality and person-
ality disorders, pages 34–47. Routledge,
2013.
[7] Lucie Galland, Catherine Pelachaud, and
Florian Pecune. Smart-dream: To condi-
tion or not to condition; a study on the im-
pact of llm conditioning on motivational
interview dialog virtual agent. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th ACM International Con-
ference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, pages
1–9, 2025.
[8] Bin Han, Deuksin Kwon, Spencer Lin,
Kaleen Shrestha, and Jonathan Gratch.
Can llms generate behaviors for embodied
virtual agents based on personality traits?
In Proceedings of the 25th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, pages 1–10, 2025.
[9] Juyeong Hwang, Seong-Eun Hong, JaeY-
oung Seon, and HyeongYeop Kang. How
does a virtual agent decide where to look?
symbolic cognitive reasoning for embod-
ied head rotation.
In Proceedings of the
SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers,
pages 1–12, 2025.
[10] Xilei Zhao,
Ruggiero Lovreglio,
and
Daniel Nilsson. Modelling and interpret-
ing pre-evacuation decision-making using
machine learning.
Automation in Con-
struction, 113:103140, 2020.
[11] Gerard Yeo, Fiona Tan An Ting, Kokil
Jaidka, Shaz Furniturewala, Wu Fanyou,
Weijie Xu, Vinija Jain, Aman Chadha,
Yang Liu, and See Kiong Ng.
Phan-
tom: Persona-based prompting has an ef-
fect on theory-of-mind reasoning in large
language models. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational AAAI Conference on Web and
Social Media, volume 19, pages 2124–
2142, 2025.
[12] Gregory Serapio-Garc´ıa, Mustafa Safdari,
Cl´ement Crepy, Luning Sun, Stephen Fitz,
Peter Romero, Marwa Abdulhai, Aleksan-
dra Faust, and Maja Matari´c. A psychome-
tric framework for evaluating and shaping
personality traits in large language models.
Nature Machine Intelligence, pages 1–15,
2025.
[13] Pei Dang, Jun Zhu, Weilian Li, Yakun Xie,
and Heng Zhang. Large-language-model-

driven agents for fire evacuation simula-
tion in a cellular automata environment.
Safety Science, 191:106935, 2025.
[14] Sen Yang, Luis Ceferino, Yi Zhang, Chen
Gu, Tong Guo, and Gen Kondo.
When
agents learn to think:
Large language
model-enhanced agent-based modeling for
crowd evacuation in disaster scenarios.
Reliability Engineering & System Safety,
page 112056, 2025.
[15] Christian Becker-Asano. WASABI: Affect
simulation for agents with believable inter-
activity, volume 319. IOS Press, 2008.
[16] LangChain overview - Docs by LangChain
—
docs.langchain.com.
https:
//docs.langchain.com/oss/
python/langchain/overview.
[Accessed 27-03-2026].
[17] OpenAI
Harmony
Response
For-
mat
—
developers.openai.com.
https://developers.openai.
com/cookbook/articles/
openai-harmony.
[Accessed 27-
03-2026].
[18] Alessandro de Lima Bicho, Rafael Ara´ujo
Rodrigues,
Soraia
Raupp
Musse,
Cl´audio
Rosito
Jung,
Marcelo
Par-
avisi, and L´eo Pini Magalh˜aes. Simulating
crowds based on a space colonization
algorithm.
Computers
&
Graphics,
36(2):70–79, 2012.
[19] https://openai.com/safety/.
[Accessed 27-03-2026].
