Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning:
A Path Toward Eliminating LLM Hallucination in Empirical Inference via
Tool-Attested Kernel Proofs
Junyu Ren 1
Abstract
Tool access alone does not make LLM empirical
reasoning governable: accepted outputs need not
descend from attested evidence, and accepted de-
ductions need not hold up under formal scrutiny.
We present EG-VAR (Evidence-Grounded Ver-
ified Agentic Reasoning), a Lean 4-based tool-
calling architecture in which the Lean kernel is
the sole minter of VERIFIED claims via tool-
attestation axioms and declared source lifts. Ev-
ery verified output structurally descends from
an attested tool call (Theorem 3.1) and a kernel-
checked chain of valid inference (Theorem 3.2);
residual outputs are honest ABSTAIN with a
replayable audit trail.
On a subcollection of
TableBench numerical reasoning (n=120), EG-
VAR attains 120/120 versus a 95% same-tool
baseline; on counterfactual stress tests (5 domains
× 2 models), EG-VAR stays 100% source-faithful
while same-tool drops to 80–90% (no-tool 50–
80%). With the LLM as deployment-time for-
malizer, residual semantic-formalization error is
3.3% on Sonnet and 1.7% on Opus. We posi-
tion EG-VAR as a technical-governance interface
for high-stakes empirical claims: a formal side-
car makes the target proposition, source scope,
evidence boundary, proof obligation, and absten-
tion condition auditable, eliminating unsupported
VERIFIED outputs today while turning formal-
ization errors, lift and source-authority disputes,
ambiguities, and abstentions into explicit audit tar-
gets. Over time, typed sidecars in datasets, APIs,
public records, and AI-generated documents can
amortize this formalization burden into reusable
infrastructure.
1Committee on Computational and Applied Mathematics, Uni-
versity of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Junyu
Ren <junyuren@uchicago.edu>.
Accepted to the TAIGR Workshop at ICML 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author.
1. Introduction
LLMs hallucinate on empirical facts when making infer-
ence, fabricating or reproducing outdated ones (Huang et al.,
2025). Tools and external memories were introduced as a
mitigation, letting the LLM consult an authoritative source
rather than rely on its parametric prior. But tool access alone
does not yield verifiable empirical claims: frontier models
exhibit strong confirmation bias, dismissing retrieved ev-
idence that conflicts with parametric memory (Xie et al.,
2024), and even state-of-the-art models struggle to stay faith-
ful to counterfactual context (Ming et al., 2025); our own
counterfactual stress tests on tables reproduce the pattern
at ∼12–15%, robust to an explicit “according to the table”
source-anchoring cue (Section 4.2).
Tool access leaves two structural failures uncovered: ac-
cepted outputs need not descend from attested evidence,
and accepted deductions need not hold up under formal
scrutiny. EG-VAR targets each with a structural contract:
every VERIFIED output must descend from an attested tool
call (Theorem 3.1), and every accepted proof step must
type-check in the Lean kernel under the declared axiom
set (Theorem 3.2). VERIFIED means attested evidence plus
kernel-checked derivation; everything else surfaces as hon-
est ABSTAIN with a replayable audit trail. We call this
combination a verified empirical claim: a claim any auditor
can later check without re-running the model.
Concretely, given a claim like “Brazil scored on average x
more goals in the 2018 opener than Italy” against a spread-
sheet, EG-VAR compiles the claim with indeterminate an-
swer into a typed goal in Lean 4. An LLM uses tool calls
to fetch attested values and compute statistics from the ta-
ble, reasons and infers an answer value derived from the
attested evidence, and proposes a Lean tactic encoding this
derivation as a proof; the Lean kernel type-checks the tactic.
Accepted: publish the answer with a machine-checkable
proof; rejected: abstain. A third party re-checks offline by
re-running Lean; the LLM need not be re-run.
Our contribution.
We present EG-VAR (Evidence-
Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning), a source-general
1
arXiv:2607.12650v1  [cs.LG]  14 Jul 2026

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
architecture for empirical claims grounded in attested exter-
nal data, with tables as the first end-to-end instantiation. To
our knowledge this is the first proof-assistant-verified archi-
tecture in Lean 4 for this setting. The LLM is one untrusted
layer in a four-layer stack: a deterministic tool layer (L1, at-
tested storage queries), a per-source formalization layer (L2,
audited semantic lifts from storage to world facts), a Lean 4
kernel that mints Verified world claims solely via attestation-
derived rules, and the solver LLM that chooses the answer
witness, substitutes it into the claim’s dependent-sum goal,
and proposes a proof the kernel checks. The key architec-
tural commitment is that mkVerified (the sole construc-
tor for Evidence Verified w) requires an Attested T
from the runtime, so every verified output structurally de-
scends from a tool call. The certified answer is extracted
as the witness of a dependent sum (Martin-L¨of, 1984) in
the Curry–Howard tradition (Howard, 1980): a question
“which entity has property P?” becomes a goal of type
Σ (e : String) (v : Value), Evidence Verified (. . . e v),
and the surface answer is the first projection of the kernel-
checked witness. Verified outputs come with replayable
proof traces; unverified claims abstain rather than guess. Un-
like symbolic factual verifiers, execution-attestation systems,
and math theorem provers (Section 2), EG-VAR combines
proof-assistant checking with attested empirical grounding.
Why a proof assistant for empirical grounding?
The
standard objection is that proof assistants are overkill
for empirical reasoning over external sources.
We dis-
agree: existing LLM-driven theorem-proving systems (Al-
phaProof (Google DeepMind, 2024), Aristotle (Achim et al.,
2025), DeepSeek-Prover (Xin et al., 2025), Hilbert (Varam-
bally et al., 2025)) already show that the substrate is not the
bottleneck; the bottleneck is audited per-source semantic
lifting, which our formalization protocol addresses (Sec-
tion 3.5; instantiated here on tables). This cost is amortized:
each per-source lift is audited once and reused across all
subsequent claims grounded in that source, so formalization
never enters the per-query inference loop.
Scope of the empirical work.
All empirical results in
this paper use the tabular instantiation and evaluate on
TableBench (Wu et al., 2025). This is the first end-to-end
demonstration of the L1/L2/lift pattern on a single sub-
strate, not the conceptual boundary of the framework; cross-
substrate validation (SQL views, typed APIs, knowledge
graphs) is future work.
Empirical findings.
On TableBench unambiguous claims
(Tier 1 gold-goal benchmark, n=120), EG-VAR attains
120/120 (100%); the same-tool same-model baseline
plateaus at 114/120 (95.0%) and the table-only single-shot
baseline at 107/120 (89.2%). On a 5-domain counterfactual
stress panel (Tier 1.5 binary-compare and direction claims,
n=20 per panel, two models, two injection regimes), EG-
VAR remains 100% source-faithful in every cell; on Sonnet
the same-tool baseline drops to 80–90% and the no-tool
baseline to 50–80%, depending on injection magnitude. Un-
der full end-to-end deployment with the LLM itself as the
formalizer (Tier 2, n=120), the pure formalizer-error rate
is 3.3% on Sonnet and 1.7% on Opus, with the remaining
disagreements split into logged ambiguities (4.2%) and sur-
faced benchmark-artifact issues (1.7%) that are auditable
rather than silent (Section 4.3). The discriminator is robust
to model strength, source cue, and flip magnitude.
A path toward eliminating LLM hallucination.
The ti-
tle claim has a precise structural meaning (Theorem 3.1):
no VERIFIED output can appear without an attested tool
leaf, under any formalizer. Semantic mis-formalization re-
mains non-zero at current LLM capability (3.3% on Sonnet,
1.7% on Opus), but this accuracy axis is addressable by fine-
tuning on the curator-grade (claim, gold goal) pairs the paper
releases (code supplement in Section G; curator pipeline
summary in Section 3.6 with full proposer/critic/kernel enu-
merate in Section G.2; case studies in Section I.2) without
weakening the structural guarantee.
Formalization flywheel.
The long-run bet is not that users
will manually write Lean. It is that empirical communica-
tion can gradually acquire formal sidecars. In the near
term, EG-VAR’s curator corpus supplies supervised and
verifier-guided training data for better NL-to-formal transla-
tion. In the medium term, many sources already move along
a substrate spectrum from CSV to SQL views, OpenAPI
schemas, knowledge graphs, and typed registries, reducing
the per-source lift burden (Section K.3). In the long term,
LLM-generated answers and documents can themselves
carry formal copies of key claims alongside prose. Data
media already carry informal instructions of use (schemas,
READMEs); EG-VAR just requires them formal. When
upstream providers themselves run EG-VAR-like pipelines,
formalization becomes mechanized rather than handcrafted,
and data arrives already bearing kernel-checked VERIFIED
instructions. The formalization burden moves out of the
per-query inference loop into reusable source-side infras-
tructure; the kernel boundary continues to enforce that only
attested claims are labeled VERIFIED.
Governance translation.
The two safety theorems (Sec-
tion 3.6), combined with the no-upcast grade discipline,
yield three structural governance properties:
(i) tool-
attestation-as-axiom enables independent audit of every veri-
fied output; (ii) grade discipline makes uncertainty typed and
queryable rather than a hidden confidence number; (iii) hon-
est abstention (a kernel rejection becomes the user-visible
outcome) is a measurable property, not a learned behaviour.
We unpack each in Section 5.2.
2

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
2. Related Work
We compare EG-VAR against four buckets of prior work
(Table 1): empirical studies of how LLMs trade off paramet-
ric priors against external context; symbolic factual verifiers;
LLM-driven theorem provers; and execution-attestation sys-
tems. Each contributes part of the trust pipeline, but none
combines a proof-assistant kernel, tool-attestation as a typed
axiom, and honest abstention as a structural property for
empirical claims.
The closest empirical prior is ClashEval (Wu et al., 2024)
(prior-vs-context conflict on frontier models across six do-
mains; our counterfactual stress tests in Section 4.2 repro-
duce its prior-retention ranking). Adjacent substrates: sym-
bolic factual verification (Aly & Vlachos, 2024; Krishna
et al., 2022; Pei et al., 2025) with learned proof-construction
components and mapping-error failure modes; post-hoc
fact-checking (Chern et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Wei
et al., 2024; Dhuliawala et al., 2024); commercial policy
guardrails (Amazon Web Services, 2024); LLM-for-math
theorem proving (Google DeepMind, 2024; Xin et al., 2025;
Achim et al., 2025; Varambally et al., 2025) (same trust
model, self-contained claims, no external grounding); aut-
oformalization (Zhou et al., 2024); long-lineage CS ver-
ification (Raggi et al., 2016; Bundy, 1988; Clarke et al.,
2003; Lahiri et al., 2013); and hardware-attested AI veri-
fication (Schnabl et al., 2025; Grigor et al., 2025a;b) (at-
tests execution provenance, not claim truth; complementary
to EG-VAR). Detailed treatment of each thread, including
the axes EG-VAR extends over ClashEval and why self-
contained-math provers do not cover empirical claims, is in
Section A.
3. EG-VAR
3.1. Four-layer stack and trust ledger
EG-VAR partitions the agentic-AI loop into four layers with
a strict trust ledger (Figure 1; Threat-model summary box
below).
L1, Tool layer (trusted, deterministic). The tool layer
exposes a fixed set of queries against a source: cell lookups,
filtered aggregates, and selection operators on tables, but
the pattern is source-agnostic. Each query produces an at-
tested payload: the deterministic answer the tool computed,
packaged with a runtime Attested T witness that records
query, source identity, and result. The runtime is the only
entity that can produce Attested T witnesses.
L2, Per-source formalization (audited offline). Tools
attest storage facts (e.g., “cell at row r, column c,
has value v”); claims live at the world-ontology level
(HasProperty, ArgmaxWhere, SumWhere, ...). The map-
ping from L1 storage facts to L2 world facts is a curator’s
Threat model (summary). Safety theorems (Theorems 3.1
and 3.2) assume: Trusted: Lean 4 kernel, EG-VAR prelude,
audited per-source lifts Λ(s), deterministic Python runtime.
Untrusted: LLM analyst/formalizer/solver; they may halluci-
nate but cannot introduce axioms. Out of scope: (i) semantic
faithfulness of τ to the NL claim; (ii) a semantically wrong au-
dited lift; (iii) source-data corruption that passes the runtime
identity-cell validator. Items (i)–(ii) detailed in Section 5.1.
L4 Solver LLM (untrusted)
L3 Lean kernel (trusted):
mints Verified via mkVerified
L2 Per-source formalization (audited)
L1 Tool layer (trusted, deterministic)
tactics
lifts
queries
Attested T
payloads
Figure 1. EG-VAR four-layer architecture. Solid arrows: control
flow. Dashed arrow: Attested T payloads, the sole load-bearing
hypothesis of mkVerified (Section 3.4).
interpretive commitment (in this paper, an audited proposer–
critic–kernel pipeline; Section G.2), encoded as a per-source
list of typed lifts that the kernel imports as axioms (Sec-
tion 3.5). The L1/L2 split keeps the formal language de-
scribing the world rather than the storage vehicle, the same
separation Codd (1970) drew between a relational schema
and the predicates it serves.
L3, Lean 4 kernel (trusted, formal). Lean type-checks
every proof step. The kernel is the only entity authorized
to mint Evidence Verified w for any world-claim w.
There is exactly one mint rule, mkVerified, which requires
an Attested T hypothesis (Section 3.4).
L4, Solver LLM (untrusted, stochastic). The LLM re-
ceives a typed goal and proposes proof tactics. The kernel
rejects invalid tactics and the rejection messages drive re-
vision. The solver cannot synthesize Attested T terms; it
can only consume those introduced by tool calls during the
loop.
Trust ledger.
The kernel, the L1 vocabulary, the per-
source lifts, and the tool adapter are auditable artifacts. The
solver is type-checked, not trusted: an arbitrarily wrong
solver can never produce a verified-but-unsupported output.
This is a structural guarantee, not a statistical one. Each
verified output is accompanied by the generated Lean proof
file, a self-contained replay artifact that any third party with
the kernel and the per-source lifts can re-typecheck.
3

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
System
Substrate
Evidence input
Checker
Residual risk
TabVer (Aly & Vlachos, 2024)
Nat. logic + arith.
Table cells
LLM + NatLog
Mapping error
ProoFVer (Krishna et al., 2022)
Natural logic
Premises
Seq2seq + NatLog
Mapping error
FoVer (Pei et al., 2025)
FOL + Z3
Indirect (CoT)
SMT
Consistency ̸⇒grounded
AWS Bedrock (Amazon Web Services, 2024)
Undisclosed
Policy text
Proprietary
Undisclosed
AlphaProof (Google DeepMind, 2024)
Lean 4 (math)
None
Lean kernel
—
DeepSeek-Prover (Xin et al., 2025)
Lean 4 (math)
None
Lean kernel
—
Attestable Audits (Schnabl et al., 2025)
TEE crypto
Exec. bytes
TEE attestation
Wrong-but-attested
Proofs of Autonomy (Grigor et al., 2025b)
MPC-TLS (Web Proofs)
Run provenance
Crypto proof
Wrong-but-attested
EG-VAR (ours)
Lean 4 + tool attest.
Attested L1→L2 lifts
Lean kernel
Honest abstention
Table 1. Prior work by substrate, evidence input (what the checker consumes to verify empirical claims), checker, and residual risk under
EG-VAR’s threat model. EG-VAR is the only row combining a proof-assistant kernel with tool-attested grounding and honest abstention
on rejection.
3.2. Tables as formal objects
The deeper move in EG-VAR is on the source side. Empiri-
cal verification fails not because claims are unformalized,
but because the source’s semantics are implicit in the tool
adapter, hidden in fuzzy retrieval, or assumed in prompt
scaffolding. The source is a co-equal trust artifact: from the
kernel’s perspective a table is an object that needs formal-
ization on the same footing as a claim.
Concretely, three things are formalized per source: (i)
an L1 storage vocabulary (CellAt, ColumnContains,
RowMatches, ...) over which tools emit attested payloads;
(ii) an L2 world ontology (HasProperty, ArgmaxWhere,
SumWhere, ...) over which claims are stated; (iii) a per-
source lift catalog (Section 3.5) encoding the curator’s
interpretive commitment about which L1 facts attest which
L2 claims under this table’s chosen semantics. The trust
artifact a third party must inspect is the lift catalog; tools
carry L1 facts deterministically, the kernel reasons only
over L2 evidence. This separates source-side curation from
claim-side reasoning, making both auditable independently.
A dataset admits multiple consistent formalizations (e.g., a
matchup table as rank-2 curried vs rank-1 with composite-
domain); these are type-isomorphic in any Cartesian closed
setting and the kernel admits any consistent one. The cura-
tor picks an interpretation and audits the lift menu against
the table; pluralism is architectural. Full gauge-freedom
argument in Section K.2.
We trade internal completeness for soundness, decidabil-
ity, and proof economy: L2 predicate equivalences (e.g.
MeanWhere ⇔SumWhere/CountWhere) are localized in
per-source lifts rather than added as kernel lemmas, keeping
proof search decidable and traces inspectable. This mirrors
SMT theory combination, description logics, and decidable
FOL fragments; detailed rationale in Section N.
3.3. Evidence grades and downcast-only
Evidence
carries
an
explicit
grade
g
∈
{VERIFIED, SUPPORTED, PLAUSIBLE, SPECULATIVE}
ordered by reliability.
The kernel admits downcasting
only (g1 ⪰g2 and e : Evidence g1 w ⇒downcast e :
Evidence g2 w). No upcast rule exists, so conclusions can-
not outrank their weakest premise. The only constructor for
Evidence Verified
is mkVerified, described next;
lower grades arise from explicit downgrades (e.g., staleness,
source-conflict) or LLM-proposed heuristic claims that the
calculus admits at PLAUSIBLE or SPECULATIVE only.
3.4. The mkVerified rule (sole minter of VERIFIED)
Informally: verified evidence exists only if the runtime
already supplied an attested payload. The kernel’s mint rule
is:
mkVerified :
forall (T : ToolId) (q : Query_T)
(p : Payload_T q)
(att : Attested_T q p) (w : WProp),
w in claims (interp_T q p) ->
Evidence Verified w
The hypothesis att :
Attested T q p is the load-
bearing element. Attested T witnesses are introduced
into the proof context only by the runtime in response to a
tool call; the solver cannot synthesize them. interp T q
p is the per-tool interpretation function (a small total Lean
function) that maps the attested payload to a finite set of L2
world claims; the kernel mints Verified for any w in that
set. There is no other path to Evidence Verified
.
3.5. Per-source formalization as the curator’s
interpretive commitment
The interesting design problem is the L1→L2 bridge. A tool
attests “cell at row r, column “state”, has value “alabama”
” (an L1 storage fact); the claim under verification is “Al-
abama has the highest HIV incidence rate” (an L2 world
fact). The bridge is a per-source list of typed lifts, audited
offline by the source’s curator, that the kernel imports as
4

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
axioms.
Per-source lifts operationalize the L1→L2 bridge: typed
composition of an attested L1 fact with a audited lift axiom
mints an Evidence Verified witness for the matching
L2 world-property. Absence of a matching lift is a feature:
the solver has no L2 proof path, the kernel rejects, and the
system abstains rather than silently guess. The L1/L2 sep-
aration is source-agnostic (SQL views, knowledge graphs,
and sensor streams admit the same pattern; Section 5.2); a
complete worked example (HIV argmax via state projec-
tion, showing the lift, attested payload, and Sigma-witness
extraction) is in Section H.1.
3.6. Operational proof object and safety theorems
The safety guarantees are stated about the runtime’s oper-
ational proof object, not about Lean’s type theory alone.
A proof object is the tuple of artifacts that the Python
implementation at src/python/runtime/pipeline.py
actually returns from run pipeline as the fields of
PipelineResult:
ProofObject(s, c) = ⟨leanFile, evidence, steps ⟩
where leanFile is the generated Lean module text, evi-
dence is the time-ordered list of tool-call payloads lifted
to observation-leaf axioms, and steps is the history of solver
actions and kernel-verbatim feedback. Figure 2 gives a con-
crete end-to-end instance for one claim. A standalone replay-
audit script (src/python/runtime/verify axioms.py,
Section G) takes leanFile as input and recomputes the
whitelist check post-hoc; the script is not invoked in the
run pipeline loop. The primary safety gate at generation
time is the Lean kernel invocation lake env lean inside
pipeline.py.
Trust zones.
Four roles participate in producing the
proof object.
Untrusted proposers:
the LLM ana-
lyst, formalizer, and solver; none can introduce new
top-level axioms because their output is constrained to
dictionary entries, a proposed goal type, and a tactic
body inserted inside a pre-written Sigma type declara-
tion.
Audited runtime-orchestrator:
the determinis-
tic Python layer that executes tools, emits observation-
leaf axioms, assembles the Lean module, invokes the
kernel,
and records evidence and steps.
Trusted
checker: the Lean 4 kernel. Trusted domain assump-
tions: the fixed EG-VAR prelude (EGVar/Basic.lean,
EGVar/TableL1.lean,
EGVar/WorldOntology.lean,
and EGVar/Tactics.lean) and the audited per-source lifts
Λ(s) from data/tier1 table formalizations.json,
committed at curation time per Section 3.6.
Whitelist-compliant module (summary).
We call lean-
File whitelist-compliant for source s iff every axiom in
Algorithm 1 RUNTIMEVERIFY:
operational defini-
tion of the runtime loop.
Trust-zone labels an-
notate each step.
The Python implementation at
src/python/runtime/pipeline.py realizes this algo-
rithm.
1: Input: claim c, source s
2: Output: proof object and verdict
3: guide ←ANALYST(s, c)
// untrusted LLM
4: goalType ←FORMALIZER(c, guide, dict, Λ(s))
5: evidence ←[ ];
steps ←[ ]
6: for i = 1 to maxSteps do
7:
action ←SOLVER(c, goalType, evidence)
8:
if action is a tool call (t, q) then
9:
payload ←EXECUTE(t, q)
// audited tool
10:
if payload succeeded then
11:
append (t, q, payload, Λ(s).lift) to evidence
12:
end if
13:
else if action is a proof attempt tac then
14:
leanFile ←BUILD(goalType, Λ(s), evidence, tac)
15:
(ok, out) ←KERNELCHECK(leanFile) // trusted
Lean kernel
16:
if ok then
17:
return (leanFile, evidence, steps), VERIFIED
18:
end if
19:
end if
20:
append (action, feedback) to steps
21: end for
22: return ⊥, ABSTAIN
the dependency closure of the claim proof belongs to one
of four buckets: the fixed EG-VAR prelude (B1), stan-
dard Lean 4 core axioms (B2), runtime-emitted observa-
tion leaves (B3), or per-source lifts matching the regex
lift [0-9a-f]+ .+ drawn from Λ(s) (B4); the closure
contains no sorry variant and at least one trust-artifact wit-
ness. Full bucket schemas, the replay-audit mechanics, and
guarantee-boundary caveats are in Section P.1.
Theorem 3.1 (No unsupported VERIFIED outputs). If
RUNTIMEVERIFY(s, c) returns (leanFile, evidence, steps)
with verdict VERIFIED, and leanFile is whitelist-compliant
for s, then every runtime-emitted observation-leaf axiom in
the dependency closure of the claim proof is backed by a
prior tool execution recorded in evidence, and every remain-
ing axiom dependency lies in the fixed EG-VAR prelude, in
the standard Lean 4 core axioms, or in Λ(s).
Theorem 3.2 (No deductive errors). Every inference step
that the system accepts as part of a VERIFIED output type-
checks in Lean 4’s kernel under the declared axiom set.
Full proofs (checker-fidelity, emission-discipline, and
reserved-name lemmas; complete proofs of Theorems 3.1
and 3.2) plus the emission-site table are in Sections P and P.1.
The kernel call inside run pipeline (lake env lean) is
5

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
NL claim: “Which state has the highest HIV rate?”
Lean goal (LLM formalizer): Σ e, v, ArgmaxWhere “rate” all e v
Tool call: argmax with id("rate") — attested payload
L1 fact: MaxCell “rate” r v ∧CellAt r “state” “alabama”
L2 lift (audited per-source): composes →ArgmaxWhere “rate” all “alabama” v
Lean kernel: typechecks mkVerified derivation
VERIFIED answer “alabama”
/
ABSTAIN if kernel rejects
Figure 2. Worked trace for one claim. Untrusted LLM output
(white) commits to a goal type; trusted runtime (gray) produces the
attested payload, composes it through the audited per-source lift,
and the Lean kernel mints VERIFIED iff the derivation type-checks.
The Sigma-witness of the accepted proof is the published answer.
the primary safety gate at generation time; the standalone
verify axioms.py is a post-hoc replay audit a third-party
can re-run offline (Sections G and P.1). Worked examples of
attested proofs and per-source lifts are in Sections H and I.
Formalization provenance.
Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 load
fixture-committed gold types τ gold and audited per-source
lifts Λ(s) from a frozen fixture (proposer–critic–kernel
pipeline, no formalizer invoked at evaluation); Tier 2 in-
vokes an LLM formalizer with access to Λ(s) but no gold
type. Full provenance (subagent pipeline, human meta-
supervision scope, curator yield, collusion firewall) is in
Section G.2.
4. Empirical Evaluation
We report three evaluations. The first two load fixture-
committed gold goal types, so they isolate the kernelized
trust architecture under ideal formalization: Section 4.1
(Tier 1) establishes competitiveness with same-tool base-
lines on unambiguous claims; Section 4.2 (Tier 1.5) estab-
lishes source-faithfulness under counterfactual prior conflict,
where the same-tool baseline on Sonnet drops to 80–90%
(no-tool 50–80%) while EG-VAR remains 100% across both
flip-magnitude regimes and both model strengths. The third
evaluation (Section 4.3, Tier 2) removes the gold-fixture
bypass and tests the deployment path where the LLM itself
proposes the formal goal.
Two axes.
We separate formal safety (the VERIFIED la-
bel is kernel-accepted against the committed trust arti-
facts; Theorem 3.1) from semantic faithfulness (the formal-
ized goal τ matches the natural-language claim; measured
by answer match against frozen gold answers). Tiers 1
and 1.5 load τ = τ gold from the frozen fixture, so semantic
faithfulness holds by construction; Tier 2 invokes the LLM
Rung
Tools
Per-source artifact
Table-only
none
— (table only)
Tools-open
full surface
none enforced
Tools-curated
menu-enforced
per-source menu
EG-VAR
menu-enforced
menu + Lean goal + lifts
Table 2.
Four-rung ladder isolating tool contribution (Table-
only →Tools-open),
per-source menu (Tools-open →Tools-
curated),
and
kernelized
fixed-goal
discipline
(Tools-
curated →EG-VAR).
formalizer, and semantic faithfulness becomes the primary
empirical question.
Setup.
Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 share four rungs (Table 2):
Table-only (single-shot, no tools); Tools-open (LLM with
full runtime tool surface, no per-source menu enforcement);
Tools-curated (per-source menu enforced; same tool surface
as EG-VAR); EG-VAR (kernel-checked, fixed-goal mode
with the curator’s typed goal). All rungs use the same model,
prompt structure, and answer judge (answers match); EG-
VAR additionally requires that the kernel mints a Verified
witness whose Sigma extract agrees with the gold an-
swer. We evaluate two models: claude-sonnet-4-6 and
claude-haiku-4-5 (a stronger and a weaker model from
the same family). All runs use temperature 0; EG-VAR is
deterministic at temperature 0 and we report 1-rep smoke
evaluations as canonical for EG-VAR with corroborating
multi-rep partial runs (provenance manifest in Section G).
Rung
Match
Table-only
107/120 (89.2%)
Tools-open
113/120 (94.2%)
Tools-curated
114/120 (95.0%)
EG-VAR
120/120 (100.0%)
Table 3. Tier 1 ladder, n=120 unambiguous TableBench claims,
claude-sonnet-4-6, temperature 0.
4.1. Tier 1 gold-goal benchmark: baseline ladder
Our LLM-based curator pipeline selects n=120 unambigu-
ous TableBench claims spanning argmax, sum, count, top-k,
and aggregation shapes; for each claim it produces the typed
Lean goal and the per-source lifts (the trust artifact EG-VAR
consumes; Section G.2). All four rungs are evaluated on
Sonnet at temperature 0. Table 3 reports the headline lad-
der. EG-VAR attains 120/120 (100%) joint formal safety
and semantic faithfulness on the gold-formalization path:
every claim’s kernel proof passes the whitelist replay (Sec-
tion G, formal safety axis) and the extracted Sigma witness
matches the curator gold (semantic-faithfulness axis). The
same-tool same-model baseline (Tools-curated) plateaus at
114/120 (95%) on the latter alone (no formal-safety surface:
baselines cannot abstain); removing the per-source menu
6

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Panel
Rung
Sonnet
Haiku
extreme-flip
Table-only
16/20
15/20
Tools-open
16/20
20/20
Tools-curated
16/20
20/20
EG-VAR
20/20
20/20
subtle-flip
Table-only
10/20
8/20
Tools-open
18/20
20/20
Tools-curated
18/20
20/20
EG-VAR
20/20
20/20
Table 4. Tier 1.5 counterfactual ladder: source-faithful count on
binary-compare and direction claims, n=20 per panel (temp 0, 1
rep). Residual = prior-override (no wrong-other cases).
costs one further claim (Tools-open 113/120); single-shot
table-only floor is 107/120 (89.2%).
4.2. Tier 1.5 counterfactual benchmark:
source-faithfulness under prior conflict
Tier 1.5 isolates a qualitatively different failure mode the
Tier 1 ladder under-counts. We construct synthetic coun-
terfactual table variants: real TableBench tables with one
or two cell values overwritten to contradict the model’s
world-knowledge prior. For each variant we ask a binary-
comparison or aggregation claim and classify the rung’s
output as source-faithful (matches the table), prior-override
(matches the un-injected real-world value), or wrong-
other. Tier 1.5’s source-faithfulness column is the semantic-
faithfulness axis under counterfactual-injection pressure;
EG-VAR’s 100% result combines this with formal-safety
(kernel replay) that the baselines lack.
Two flip-magnitude regimes.
The extreme-flip panel uses
magnitude-10-plus reversals (e.g., Italy GDP →$50, Patri-
ots →0–16, Sinopec →$50) across 5 domains; the subtle-
flip panel uses 10–25% reversals (Mont Blanc →4500 m
vs Monte Rosa 4634 m, Madrid GDP 90 vs Berlin 95) on
a panel shifted to stable-scalar priors (country populations,
EU country area, European city GDP, Forbes top companies,
Alpine peak elevations). Each panel is 5 domains × 2 entity-
pair injections × 3 claim shapes = 30 claims per panel (20
binary-compare + direction, 10 cell-lookup; the cell-lookup
set doesn’t trigger prior-override and is excluded here). Ta-
ble 4 reports the n=20 binary-compare + direction cells;
both models, 1 rep (temp 0, deterministic).
The extreme-flip panel narrows the residual same-tool gap
to the single most entrenched prior family (country pop-
ulations). The subtle-flip panel generalizes prior-override
across stable-scalar domains; tools rescue most of it, and
the kernel closes the rest.
Per-claim robustness axes (authority-cue, model strength,
domain coverage) and the same-tool failure-mode taxonomy
are in Section E.1.
Category
Sonnet
Opus
Correct
84.2%
87.5%
Ambiguous claim (logged)
4.2%
4.2%
Benchmark gold error (surfaced)
1.7%
1.7%
Semantic formalizer error
3.3%
1.7%
Honest abstain
2.5%
5.0%
Solver gave up
4.2%
0.0%
Table 5. Tier 2 decomposition, n=120. Category definitions in
Section L.
4.3. Tier 2 end-to-end evaluation: LLM formalizer
Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 bypass the NL-to-Lean formalizer step
by loading the fixture-committed goal type from a frozen
fixture (Section 3.6). Tier 2 removes that bypass: at de-
ployment time, the runtime invokes the LLM formalizer
(Section 3.6) to propose lean goal type per claim, then
proceeds with the same analyst-formalizer-solver-kernel
loop. This is the fully automated regime; no curator interac-
tion at runtime.
Setup.
n=120 claims, same TableBench curated fixture.
claude-sonnet-4-6 at temperature 0. Pipeline: analyst
→formalizer →solver. The audited per-source formaliza-
tion Λ(s) is still loaded; only the claim-level goal type is
LLM-proposed. We classify every output into one of six
mutually-exclusive reporting categories, based on three ob-
servables: type-equality with the curator’s gold goal type
(kernel-rfl on string-normalized forms), kernel acceptance,
and answer-match against the gold answer (Table 5).
Formal safety versus semantic faithfulness.
Tier 2 mea-
sures two distinct properties. Formal safety is structural and
model-independent: every VERIFIED proof still depends
on an attested tool leaf, regardless of which LLM proposed
the goal type (Theorem 3.1). Semantic faithfulness is op-
erational and model-dependent: it measures whether the
LLM-proposed goal matches the frozen reading of the claim.
Table 5 reports the semantic-faithfulness axis per model; the
Semantic formalizer error row is the pure formalizer-error
rate.
Tier 2 under counterfactual pressure.
To check that the
LLM-as-formalizer pipeline is not just a curator-fixture ar-
tifact, we re-run Tier 2 Sonnet on the Tier 1.5 extreme-flip
panel, restricted to binary-compare and direction claims
(n=20, prior-override-injected tables). Every claim pro-
duces a source-faithful VERIFIED output (20/20 SF), with
the extracted Sigma witness matching the table-injected an-
swer rather than the model’s world-knowledge prior. The
Tier 1.5 same-tool baseline drops to 16/20 on the same
extreme-flip tables (Section 4.2); Tier 2 with end-to-end
LLM formalization matches EG-VAR’s gold-formalization
rung on this subset.
7

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
5. Discussion
5.1. Limitations
Three scope limitations bound the empirical claims.
(i) Tier 1/1.5 bypass the formalizer by loading fixture-
committed gold types from a frozen fixture (Section 3.6);
Tier 2 removes that bypass. (ii) Tools, per-source lifts, and
the L1 adapter are trusted; a semantically wrong audited lift
can certify a wrong formalized claim (Section 3.5). (iii) All
evaluations are on single TableBench tables; multi-source,
KG, and streaming sources are out of scope. Detailed scope
limits are in Section M.
5.2. Governance translation
Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 and the no-upcast grade discipline
yield three governance-relevant structural properties.
(G1) Auditable evidence trails. Every Verified output
carries the generated Lean proof file as its replay artifact: a
third-party auditor with the kernel, per-source lifts, and tool
adapter can re-typecheck the claim from the attested payload
without re-running the LLM. The proof term is a truthmaker
in Fine (2017)’s sense: the specific attested state of affairs
that grounds the claim. Composition of evidence across
multiple lifts carries the algebraic structure of a provenance
semiring (Green et al., 2007). The trust artifact is enumer-
able (L1 vocabulary, per-source lifts, tool adapter, kernel);
audit cost is amortized, each per-source lift audited once at
curation time and reused across all subsequent claims.
(G2) Typed uncertainty.
Grade discipline (no-upcast,
minimum-of-premises) makes uncertainty inspectable
rather than a hidden confidence number.
The graded
Evidence g w object is operationally close to a justifica-
tion term (Artemov, 2008), where evidence is explicit rather
than folded into a model’s posterior. A PLAUSIBLE output
cannot be silently re-introduced downstream as VERIFIED;
an auditor can query which claims arrived at which grade
and why.
(G3) Honest abstention. A kernel rejection surfaces as a
user-visible ABSTAIN, not a silent fallback guess. Refusal
thresholds are externally specifiable (a downstream policy
can require VERIFIED and reject ABSTAIN, or admit AB-
STAIN as a flagged state, without re-implementing the trust
boundary); the abstention rate is measurable per-source; the
failure mode is auditable rather than learned.
Portability beyond tables.
The L1/L2/lift pattern is
source-agnostic: SQL views, knowledge graphs, and sensor
streams each admit the same per-source-formalization treat-
ment under a matching attestation discipline. The empirical
cross-substrate panel is itemized in Section 5.3; the broader
substrate- adoption argument (formalization gap shrinks as
sources become formal; Section K.3).
5.3. Future work scoped to governance reach
Three extensions: (1) fine-tuning the NL formalizer on
the curator-provided (claim, gold type) corpus with ker-
nel acceptance as the reward signal, an accuracy interven-
tion that tightens the Tier 2 residual rate without weaken-
ing Theorem 3.1; (2) multi-source attestation with conflict-
downgrade rules (VERIFIED →SUPPORTED on detected dis-
agreement); (3) cross-substrate panel (KG-grounded, SQL-
grounded) to test the L1/L2 portability claim (Section 5.2).
Detail in Section M.
6. Conclusion
EG-VAR is an architecture for verified empirical claims
grounded in attested external data, instantiated on tables as
the first end-to-end substrate. Tool access alone does not
suffice: frontier LLMs prior-override counterfactual tables
on a measurable fraction of claims. EG-VAR addresses this
architecturally: the Lean 4 kernel mints VERIFIED claims
only under tool attestation and type-checks every accepted
proof step. TableBench Tier 1 (n=120) closes the same-tool
gap to zero; Tier 1.5 counterfactuals (n=20 per panel, two
flip regimes, two models) stay 100% source-faithful while
same-tool drops to 80–90% (no-tool 50–80%); end-to-end
Tier 2 with LLM formalization bounds formalizer error at
3.3% (Sonnet), 1.7% (Opus).
The core contribution is structural. Theorem 3.1 rules out
unsupported VERIFIED outputs model-independently; The-
orem 3.2 guarantees that every accepted deduction type-
checks under the declared axiom set. Remaining failures are
not silent hallucinations but measurable, auditable formal-
ization failures, logged ambiguities, or honest abstentions.
This is a constructive path toward eliminating LLM halluci-
nation in empirical inference: the safety floor is architectural
today; the semantic-formalization residual is an explicit ac-
curacy target addressable by formalizer fine-tuning on the
curator corpus, consensus formalization, and longer-term
typed sidecars on sources and LLM-generated documents.
For AI governance, three properties become enforceable
at the system boundary rather than learned behaviours: au-
ditable evidence trails via replayable per-claim Lean proofs,
typed uncertainty under no-upcast grade discipline, and ex-
ternally specifiable refusal thresholds via honest abstention.
Verifiable grounding generalises as an architectural proto-
col rather than a table-specific trick: the same L1/L2/lift
discipline can in principle apply to SQL views, knowledge
graphs, typed registries, and other attested sources. Vali-
dating beyond tables is the immediate empirical next step;
the longer-run bet is that as sources and documents acquire
typed sidecars, more of the formalization burden moves
from inference loops into reusable infrastructure.
8

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Acknowledgements
I thank the TAIGR reviewers for feedback that sharpened
the governance framing and the distinction between unsup-
ported VERIFIED outputs and semantic-formalization fail-
ures. JR is partially supported by a Vannevar Bush Faculty
Fellowship ONR N000142312863.
References
Abiteboul, S., Buneman, P., and Suciu, D. Data on the
Web: From Relations to Semistructured Data and XML.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
Achim, T. et al.
Aristotle: IMO-level automated theo-
rem proving, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.
01346.
Alchourr´on, C. E., G¨ardenfors, P., and Makinson, D. On
the logic of theory change: partial meet contraction and
revision functions. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50(2):
510–530, 1985.
Aly, R. and Vlachos, A. TabVer: Tabular fact verification
with natural logic. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 12:1648–1671, 2024. doi:
10.1162/tacl a 00722. https://aclanthology.org/
2024.tacl-1.89/.
Amazon Web Services. What are Automated Reasoning
checks in Amazon Bedrock Guardrails?, 2024.
Doc-
umentation,
accessed
2026-04-23.
https://docs.
aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/
guardrails-automated-reasoning-checks.html.
Anderson, A. R. and Belnap, N. D. Entailment: The Logic of
Relevance and Necessity, volume 1. Princeton University
Press, 1975.
Artemov, S.
The logic of justification.
The Review of
Symbolic Logic, 1(4):477–513, 2008.
Barwise, J. and Perry, J. Situations and Attitudes. MIT
Press, 1983.
Belnap, N. D.
A useful four-valued logic.
In Dunn,
J. M. and Epstein, G. (eds.), Modern Uses of Multiple-
Valued Logic, volume 2 of Episteme, pp. 5–37. D. Reidel
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, 1977. doi: 10.1007/
978-94-010-1161-7 2.
Bundy, A. The use of explicit plans to guide inductive proofs.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Automated Deduction (CADE-9), volume 310 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 111–120. Springer, 1988.
Burgess, J. P. and Rosen, G. A Subject With No Object:
Strategies for Nominalistic Interpretation of Mathematics.
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Caminada, M. and Amgoud, L. On the evaluation of argu-
mentation formalisms. Artificial Intelligence, 171(5-6):
286–310, 2007.
Chern, I.-C. et al. FacTool: Factuality detection in genera-
tive AI — a tool augmented framework for multi-task and
multi-domain scenarios, 2023. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2307.13528.
Clarke, E., Grumberg, O., Jha, S., Lu, Y., and Veith, H.
Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement for sym-
bolic model checking. Journal of the ACM, 50(5):752–
794, 2003.
Codd, E. F. A relational model of data for large shared
data banks. Communications of the ACM, 13(6):377–387,
1970.
Cooper, R. Type theory and semantics in flux. In Kemp-
son, R., Fernando, T., and Asher, N. (eds.), Philosophy of
Linguistics, volume 14 of Handbook of the Philosophy of
Science, pp. 271–323. North-Holland (Elsevier), Amster-
dam, 2012. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51747-0.50009-3.
de Moura, L. and Ullrich, S. The Lean 4 theorem prover
and programming language.
In Proceedings of the
28th International Conference on Automated Deduction
(CADE-28). Springer, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37.
Dhuliawala, S., Komeili, M., Xu, J., Raileanu, R., Li, X.,
Celikyilmaz, A., and Weston, J. Chain-of-verification
reduces hallucination in large language models.
In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: ACL 2024, pp. 3563–3578. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
findings-acl.212. https://aclanthology.org/2024.
findings-acl.212/.
Donnellan, K. S. Reference and definite descriptions. The
Philosophical Review, 75(3):281–304, 1966.
Doyle, J. A truth maintenance system. Artificial Intelligence,
12(3):231–272, 1979.
Fine, K. Truthmaker semantics. In Hale, B., Wright, C.,
and Miller, A. (eds.), A Companion to the Philosophy of
Language, pp. 556–577. Wiley-Blackwell, 2017.
Frege, G. ¨Uber Sinn und Bedeutung. Zeitschrift f¨ur Philoso-
phie und philosophische Kritik, 100:25–50, 1892.
Gao, L. et al. RARR: Researching and revising what lan-
guage models say, using language models. In Proceedings
of ACL, 2023.
Goldman, A. I. What is justified belief? In Pappas, G. S.
(ed.), Justification and Knowledge: New Studies in Epis-
temology, pp. 1–23. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dor-
drecht, 1979.
9

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Google DeepMind.
AI achieves silver-medal standard
solving International Mathematical Olympiad problems,
2024. https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/
ai-solves-imo-problems-at-silver-medal-level/.
Green, T. J., Karvounarakis, G., and Tannen, V. Provenance
semirings. In PODS, pp. 31–40, 2007.
Grigor, A., Schroeder de Witt, C., Birnbach, S., and Mar-
tinovic, I. VET your agent: Towards host-independent
autonomy via verifiable execution traces, 2025a. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2512.15892.
Grigor, A., Schroeder de Witt, C., and Martinovic, I. Proofs
of autonomy: Scalable and practical verification of AI
autonomy. In Workshop on Technical AI Governance
(TAIG@ICML), 2025b. OpenReview qxFgQHN69d.
Howard, W. A. The formulae-as-types notion of construc-
tion. In Seldin, J. P. and Hindley, J. R. (eds.), To H. B.
Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus
and Formalism, pp. 479–490. Academic Press, 1980.
Hu, V. C., Ferraiolo, D., Kuhn, R., Schnitzer, A., Sandlin, K.,
Miller, R., and Scarfone, K. Guide to attribute based ac-
cess control (ABAC) definition and considerations. Tech-
nical report, NIST SP 800-162, 2014.
Huang, L., Yu, W., Ma, W., Zhong, W., Feng, Z., Wang,
H., Chen, Q., Peng, W., Feng, X., Qin, B., and Liu,
T. A survey on hallucination in large language mod-
els: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open ques-
tions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 2025.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05232.
Jøsang, A. Subjective Logic: A Formalism for Reasoning
Under Uncertainty. Springer, 2016.
Kripke, S. A. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University
Press, 1980.
Krishna, A., Riedel, S., and Vlachos, A. ProoFVer: Nat-
ural logic theorem proving for fact verification. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 10:1013–1030, 2022. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00503.
https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.59/.
Lahiri, S. K., McMillan, K. L., Sharma, R., and Hawblitzel,
C. Differential assertion checking. In ESEC/FSE, 2013.
Li, J., Yu, L., and Ettinger, A. Counterfactual reasoning:
Testing language models’ understanding of hypothetical
scenarios. In Proceedings of ACL (short), 2023. https:
//aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.70/.
Mac Lane, S. Categories for the Working Mathematician.
Springer, 1971.
Mallen, A., Asai, A., Zhong, V., Das, R., Khashabi, D.,
and Hajishirzi, H.
When not to trust language mod-
els: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-
parametric memories.
In Proceedings of ACL, 2023.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10511.
Marjanovi´c, S. V., Yu, H., Atanasova, P., Maistro, M., Li-
oma, C., and Augenstein, I. DYNAMICQA: Tracing
internal knowledge conflicts in language models. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2024, pp. 14346–14360. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
findings-emnlp.838. https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
17023.
Martin-L¨of, P. Intuitionistic type theory. Bibliopolis, Naples,
1984.
Ming, Y. et al.
FaithEval: Can your language model
stay faithful to context, even if “The Moon is Made
of Marshmallows”?
In Proceedings of ICLR, 2025.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.03727.
Montague, R. The proper treatment of quantification in
ordinary English. In Hintikka, J., Moravcsik, J. M. E.,
and Suppes, P. (eds.), Approaches to Natural Language:
Proceedings of the 1970 Stanford Workshop on Grammar
and Semantics, pp. 221–242. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1973.
Pei, Y., Du, Y., and Jin, X.
FoVer: First-order logic
verification for natural language reasoning.
Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
13:1340–1359, 2025. https://aclanthology.org/
2025.tacl-1.61/.
Quine, W. V. O. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays.
Columbia University Press, 1969.
Raggi, D., Bundy, A., Grov, G., and Pease, A. Automating
change of representation for proofs in discrete mathe-
matics (extended version). Mathematics in Computer
Science, 10(4):429–457, 2016. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11786-016-0275-z.
Schnabl, C., Hugenroth, D., Marino, B., and Beresford,
A. R. Attestable audits: Verifiable AI safety benchmarks
using trusted execution environments. In Workshop on
Technical AI Governance (TAIG@ICML), 2025. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2506.23706.
The Univalent Foundations Program.
Homotopy Type
Theory: Univalent Foundations of Mathematics.
In-
stitute
for
Advanced
Study,
2013.
https://
homotopytypetheory.org/book/.
Varambally, S., Voice, T., Sun, Y., Chen, Z., Yu, R., and
Ye, K. Hilbert: Recursively building formal proofs with
informal reasoning, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2509.22819.
10

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Wei, J., Yang, C., Song, X., Lu, Y., Hu, N., Huang, J.,
Tran, D., Peng, D., Liu, R., Huang, D., Du, C., and Le,
Q. V. Long-form factuality in large language models.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 37, 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-2567. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2403.18802.
Wu, K., Wu, E., and Zou, J. ClashEval: Quantifying the
tug-of-war between an LLM’s internal prior and external
evidence. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (Datasets and Benchmarks Track), 2024. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.10198.
Wu, X., Yang, J., Chai, L., Zhang, G., Liu, J., Du, X.,
Liang, D., Shu, D., Cheng, X., Sun, T., Li, T., Li,
Z., and Niu, G.
TableBench: A comprehensive and
complex benchmark for table question answering. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, volume 39, pp. 25497–25506, 2025.
doi:
10.1609/aaai.v39i24.34739. https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/34739.
Xie, J., Zhang, K., Chen, J., Lou, R., and Su, Y. Adaptive
chameleon or stubborn sloth: Revealing the behavior
of large language models in knowledge conflicts.
In
Proceedings of ICLR, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.13300.
Xin, H. et al. DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5: Harnessing proof
assistant feedback for reinforcement learning and monte-
carlo tree search. In Proceedings of ICLR, 2025. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2408.08152.
Zhou, J. P., Staats, C., Li, W., Szegedy, C., Weinberger,
K. Q., and Wu, Y. Don’t trust: Verify — grounding LLM
quantitative reasoning with autoformalization. In ICLR,
2024. arXiv:2403.18120.
11

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
A. Extended related work
Prior-vs-source conflict in LLMs.
The closest empirical prior is ClashEval (Wu et al., 2024), which evaluates frontier
models on prior-vs-context conflict across six domains. They report >60% prior-override on incorrect retrieved content and
that Claude scores highest on prior retention among the frontier families evaluated (Context-Bias 0.157 for Opus, 0.201
for Sonnet, 0.245 for Gemini 1.5, 0.304 for GPT-4o). Our counterfactual stress tests reproduce this ranking quantitatively
for Sonnet (Section 4.2). We extend the analysis along two axes prior work has not separated: (i) authority-cue robustness
— explicit “according to the table” framing rescues some claim shapes but not the strongest prior-bound ones; and
(ii) flip-magnitude regime — subtle plausible flips trigger prior-override on 4 of 5 stable-scalar domains where extreme
flips trigger only one, suggesting the model treats outrageous tool outputs as “alternate scenarios.” This disambiguates
dynamicity (Marjanovi´c et al., 2024) from popularity (Mallen et al., 2023) in the trigger pattern, and is consistent with Li
et al. (2023)’s finding that counterfactual behavior depends on interactions between world knowledge and contextual cues.
Symbolic factual verification.
TabVer (Aly & Vlachos, 2024) and ProoFVer (Krishna et al., 2022) each verify factual
statements against evidence using natural logic. Each relies on learned components to construct or align the proof, and
neither uses a proof-assistant kernel to check the entire source-to-statement derivation; mapping errors can therefore still
yield incorrect verdicts. FoVer (Pei et al., 2025) translates chain-of-thought into first-order logic checked by Z3, but verifies
reasoning consistency rather than empirical grounding — a CoT can be internally consistent yet factually disconnected from
the source. Post-hoc fact-checking pipelines such as FacTool (Chern et al., 2023), RARR (Gao et al., 2023), SAFE (Wei
et al., 2024), and CoVe (Dhuliawala et al., 2024) attempt detection after generation rather than structural grounding during
generation; they catch some hallucinations but cannot guarantee abstention on ungrounded outputs. Commercial guardrails
such as AWS Bedrock’s automated reasoning checks (Amazon Web Services, 2024) occupy a related space at the policy-rule
layer. EG-VAR differs by replacing the learned/shallow checker with a proof-assistant kernel and a typed evidence calculus,
structurally translating kernel rejection into user-visible abstention.
Proof-assistant theorem proving (math).
A separate large literature applies LLMs to mathematical theorem proving
via Lean, Coq, or Isabelle: AlphaProof (Google DeepMind, 2024), Aristotle (Achim et al., 2025), DeepSeek-Prover (Xin
et al., 2025), Hilbert (Varambally et al., 2025). These systems share our trust model (LLM untrusted, kernel trusted) but
operate on self-contained mathematical claims — proof obligations derivable from the calculus alone, with no external
grounding. The novel architectural commitment in EG-VAR is the mkVerified mint rule (Section 3.4), which requires an
Attested T from the tool runtime as a hypothesis — extending the proof-assistant trust model to empirical claims grounded
in deterministic external sources. Autoformalization systems such as DTV (Zhou et al., 2024) use a similar LLM-as-
formalizer pattern; Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 bypass the deployment-time formalizer via fixture-committed gold formalizations
generated by the proposer–critic–kernel pipeline, isolating the kernel-discipline contribution.
Lineage in CS verification.
The systems-level concerns that shape EG-VAR — separating semantic specification from
proof strategy, refusing to weaken the specification when the proof gets hard, and inheriting kernel-checked discipline from
a substrate designed for harder claims — are old questions in the verification literature. Raggi et al. (2016) formalize that
semantically equivalent encodings can have very different proof difficulty, motivating our refusal to add cross-predicate
equivalence lemmas in the kernel. Bundy (1988) introduced explicit proof planning, anticipating our formalizer/solver
information barrier. CEGAR (Clarke et al., 2003) established the discipline of refining the verification plan, not the semantic
target, when proofs fail — the same discipline our masked-table architecture enforces on the formalizer. Differential assertion
checking (Lahiri et al., 2013) uses relative specifications to make cross-version program changes checkable; our per-source
formalization protocol similarly makes an otherwise implicit comparison boundary explicit, but for empirical sources.
EG-VAR inherits these moves and applies them at a different boundary: not program correctness, but LLM-mediated
empirical claim verification. The novelty is the transfer and recombination, not the invention of the underlying discipline.
Hardware-attested AI verification.
Attestable Audits (Schnabl et al., 2025) use Trusted Execution Environments to emit
remote-attestation signatures binding Hash(model), Hash(audit code), and a benchmark digest, proving that approved bytes
executed on approved inputs. Proofs of Autonomy (Grigor et al., 2025b) define a pluggable component-proof framework and
instantiate it with MPC-assisted TLS transcripts (Web Proofs), binding agent actions to verifiable execution traces specified
by an immutable Agent Card (see also Grigor et al., 2025a). Both verify execution provenance — who ran the computation,
on what bytes — not whether the computation’s claims are true. EG-VAR is complementary: we typecheck a deductive
derivation of each empirical claim from attested tool payloads, ruling out verified hallucinations at the logical level rather
12

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
than the cryptographic level. An EG-VAR runtime could in principle run inside such an enclave for stack composition.
B. Per-claim diff for the Tier 1 ladder
The
supplement
includes
scripts/tier1/build baseline ladder csv.py,
which
generates
baseline ladder per claim.csv from the four E1 rung JSONLs: one row per Tier 1 claim with the goal type,
gold answer, and per-rung (Table-only / Tools-open / Tools-curated / EG-VAR) status, answer string, and match flag. The 6
claims that distinguish EG-VAR from Tools-curated are flagged in the output.
C. The EG-VAR Lean 4 library
The EG-VAR prelude is shipped as a self-contained Lean 4 library at src/lean/ with a Lake build (lakefile.toml). The
library is the kernel-trusted portion of the trust ledger (Section 3.1): every generated claim module imports it verbatim, and
Theorem 3.1’s whitelist-bucket B1 refers to its declarations. This appendix documents the module layout, the extension
surface, and the third-party replay-audit contract.
Module layout.
The library root EGVar.lean re-exports eight modules:
• EGVar.Basic — sorts and kernel mint rule: the abstract WProp world-proposition sort, the Grade inductive
(Speculative ≺Plausible ≺Supported ≺Verified) with meet/join lattice laws, the Evidence family,
Attested T/ClaimTag T/claimWProp, and the sole Verified-minter mkVerified. Contains downcast (the only
grade-weakening step) and the common-sense CSAttestation / mkPlausible path.
• EGVar.Safety — the structural lemmas used in Section P (evidence-closure discipline, downcast non-upgrade).
• EGVar.TableL1 — L1 storage-vocabulary shells:
RowHandle, CellAt, Cond constructors (all, propEq,
propContains, propGte, and, or), and the L1 predicate shells (SumCells, CountCells, CountDistinctCells,
MeanCells, MaxCellValue/MinCellValue, MaxCell/MinCell, TopK*Cells, BottomK*Cells).
• EGVar.WorldOntology — L2 world-property predicates: HasProperty, Value (with asRat, ValueGt), and
the L2 predicates that per-source lifts target (SumWhere, CountWhere, MeanWhere, MaxWhere/MinWhere,
ArgmaxWhere/ArgminWhere, TopK*Where, BottomK*Where). This module defines the vocabulary in which Λ(s)
entries are phrased.
• EGVar.WorldRules — structural world-proposition combinators (PLift propositional lifting, PProd conjunction as
Sigma-tail, sigma-binding utilities).
• EGVar.Tactics — proof-tactic helpers used by the solver (Sigma-witness refine patterns, exact sugar for L2
discharge).
• EGVar.Ontology, EGVar.Rules — legacy weather/finance domain axioms kept for backward compatibility with
Phase 1 fixtures; not imported by Tier 1/1.5/2 generated modules.
Library build.
The Lake manifest declares a single library target EGVar and an executable target egvar (rooted at
Main.lean) for interactive smoke-testing. A third-party user runs lake build once to compile the library, then lake env
lean <generated claim>.lean to elaborate a generated proof against the prelude. The runtime orchestrator invokes
exactly this command at pipeline.py:4428; the replay-audit script verify axioms.py invokes the same elaboration
with additional #print axioms processing.
Extension surface.
Adding a new tool to EG-VAR reduces to three kernel-level steps, each kernel-checked: (i) declare
a new ToolId (a pure identifier) and its Query T and Payload T families in a user-supplied module; (ii) extend the
L1 predicate menu in the style of EGVar.TableL1 if the tool exposes a new storage shape; (iii) add the corresponding
L2 predicates and per-source lifts targeting them in the style of EGVar.WorldOntology. The mint rule mkVerified is
unchanged: every new tool reuses the same Evidence Verified-constructor path and cannot weaken Theorem 3.1. Adding
a new ontology role-slot (entity or property) is purely data: both are String literals under R5/R10 per Section 3.5 and
require no kernel changes.
13

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Third-party replay-audit contract.
A deployment that publishes EG-VAR-generated answers as trust-bearing artifacts
must publish the following bundle for each answer: (a) the generated .lean module (the leanFile field of the proof object,
Section 3.6); (b) the pinned commit hash of the EG-VAR library and of data/tier1 table formalizations.json;
(c) the corresponding entry of the evidence log describing which tool executions backed the observation-leaf axioms.
Any third party holding this bundle and a Lean 4 toolchain can re-run the audit by cloning the EG-VAR library at
the pinned commit, running lake build, then running python -m runtime.verify axioms <claim module>.lean
(which invokes the kernel, reads #print axioms, and checks the bucket predicate); no LLM is invoked during replay. We
treat this contract as central to the paper’s attestable claim; the library is designed so that the boundary between trusted and
untrusted artifacts is mechanically checkable offline, not contingent on the original generation pipeline being available.
Line counts.
The eight modules total ≈1.35 kLOC: Basic 192, Ontology 210 (legacy), Rules 148 (legacy), Safety 86,
TableL1 134, Tactics 217, WorldOntology 278, WorldRules 82. Excluding the two legacy modules the active prelude
is ≈1.0 kLOC. This is the full trusted Lean code that a third-party auditor must read to evaluate Theorem 3.1’s B1 bucket;
the other three buckets (B2–B4) are verified by the mechanical verify axioms.py predicate.
C.1. Code listings
We reproduce the key signatures so that the main-text references to Evidence, mkVerified, Cond, HasProperty,
ArgmaxWhere, and ValueGt typecheck against the actual kernel definitions imported by every generated proof.
Sorts and the kernel mint rule (src/lean/EGVar/Basic.lean).
-- World propositions: separate sort from Prop
opaque WProp : Type
-- Evidence grades, ordered Verified > ... > Speculative
inductive Grade where
| Verified
| Supported
| Plausible
| Speculative
-- Indexed evidence type
opaque Evidence : Grade -> WProp -> Type
-- Sole minter of Evidence Grade.Verified
axiom mkVerified
{T : ToolId} {q : Query_T T} {p : Payload_T T q}
(att : Attested_T T q p)
{w : WProp}
(mem : ClaimOf w (interp_T T q p)) :
Evidence Grade.Verified w
-- Downcast: only direction
axiom downcast {g1 g2 : Grade} {w : WProp}
(h : g1 >= g2) (e : Evidence g1 w) :
Evidence g2 w
World ontology (src/lean/EGVar/WorldOntology.lean).
-- Value type: numeric via Rat, or string identifier
inductive Value where
| int
(n : Int)
| rat
(r : Rat)
| str
(s : String)
-- Core L2 world facts
axiom HasProperty
(entity : String) (property : String)
(value : Value) : WProp
14

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
axiom Relation
(subject : String) (rel : RelName)
(object : String) : WProp
-- Aggregate predicates
axiom SumWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom CountWhere (col : String) (c : Cond) (n : Value) : WProp
axiom MeanWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom MaxWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom MinWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
-- Entity-anchored aggregate (level 3 of App H hierarchy)
axiom ArgmaxWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(entity : String) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom ArgminWhere
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(entity : String) (v : Value) : WProp
-- Decidable Prop-level value comparisons
def ValueGt (a b : Value) : Prop :=
match a.toRat, b.toRat with
| some x, some y => x > y
| _, _ => False
-- (analogous: ValueLt, ValueGte, ValueLte, ValueEq;
-- all carry Decidable instances)
-- Composable filter
inductive Cond where
| propEq
(col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| propGt
(col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| propLt
(col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| propGte
(col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| propLte
(col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| propContains (col : String) (v : Value) : Cond
| and (c1 c2 : Cond) : Cond
| or
(c1 c2 : Cond) : Cond
| not (c : Cond)
: Cond
| all
: Cond
L1 storage primitives (src/lean/EGVar/TableL1.lean).
-- Row-handle (opaque): the per-source lift binds to it
opaque RowHandle : Type
-- L1 facts: tools attest these directly
axiom CellAt
(r : RowHandle) (col : String) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom MaxCellValue
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom MinCellValue
(col : String) (c : Cond) (v : Value) : WProp
-- Row-anchored aggregates: identify which row achieves the max/min
axiom MaxCell
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(r : RowHandle) (v : Value) : WProp
axiom MinCell
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(r : RowHandle) (v : Value) : WProp
Per-source lift example (curated for the lunar-craters table).
The lift binds an L1 MaxCell witness with an L1 CellAt
witness on the “name” column to mint an L2 ArgmaxWhere claim:
15

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
axiom craters_lift_argmax_via_name_proj
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(r : RowHandle) (name : String) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified (MaxCell col c r v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CellAt r "name" (Value.str name)) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(ArgmaxWhere col c name v)
This is the curator’s interpretive commitment for this table: “name” is the row-identifying column, so an argmax with id
tool result lifts uniquely to an ArgmaxWhere claim under any Cond. A different table whose row-identifying column is, say,
state carries its own analogous lift; the two are independent.
D. Per-source lift catalog (countries-population table)
To make “per-source formalization is the trust artifact” concrete, we reproduce the lift catalog the curator pipeline produced
for the countries-population table (04744378... in TableBench). This is the table that all of no-cue pilot, authority-cued
pilot, and subtle-flip panel D1 use, so the catalog underpins the empirical claims in Section 4.2. The full catalog has 63 lifts;
we show one representative per L2 predicate cluster.
Curator’s interpretation declaration.
“Country populations 2013. Identity column = country (or dependent
territory). Numeric columns: rank, july 1 2013 projection, % of pop, average relative annual growth (%), average
absolute annual growth (all strict numerics).”
Aggregate-only lifts (level 1 in App H hierarchy).
One lift per (column, aggregate operation) pair. All have the same
shape: L1 column-strict aggregate →L2 *Where claim. Examples on the population column:
axiom lift_04744378_pop_sum
(c : Cond) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified
(SumCells "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(SumWhere "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v)
axiom lift_04744378_pop_mean
(c : Cond) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified
(MeanCells "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(MeanWhere "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v)
axiom lift_04744378_pop_max
(c : Cond) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified
(MaxCellValue "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(MaxWhere "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v)
axiom lift_04744378_pop_count_where
(c : Cond) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CountCells "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CountWhere "july 1 , 2013 projection" c v)
Analogous lifts exist for MinWhere, TopKSumWhere, TopKMeanWhere, BottomKSumWhere, BottomKMeanWhere, and
CountDistinctWhere.
Entity-anchored lifts (level 3 in App H hierarchy).
The curator commits that country (or dependent territory)
is the row-identifying column. Each row-identifying lift takes an L1 row-anchored aggregate (MaxCell / MinCell) plus an
L1 CellAt on the identity column to mint an ArgmaxWhere or ArgminWhere L2 claim.
16

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
axiom lift_04744378_pop_argmax_via_country
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(r : RowHandle) (name : String) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified (MaxCell col c r v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CellAt r "country (or dependent territory)"
(Value.str name)) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(ArgmaxWhere col c name v)
axiom lift_04744378_pop_argmin_via_country
(col : String) (c : Cond)
(r : RowHandle) (name : String) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified (MinCell col c r v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CellAt r "country (or dependent territory)"
(Value.str name)) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(ArgminWhere col c name v)
The argmax/argmin lifts are parametric over the measure column — one lift per identity column suffices to cover argmax
claims on any numeric column, which is why the full catalog has 5 entity-anchored entries (one per identity choice), not
5×5.
Cell-lookup lift.
A single lift mints HasProperty claims by composing two L1 CellAt attestations: the entity at row r
in the identity column equals e, and the value at row r in the measure column equals v.
axiom lift_04744378_pop_cell_lookup
(e : String) (col : String)
(r : RowHandle) (v : Value) :
Evidence Grade.Verified
(CellAt r "country (or dependent territory)"
(Value.str e)) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified (CellAt r col v) ->
Evidence Grade.Verified
(HasProperty e col v)
What this catalog buys (and what it doesn’t).
Composition is by lift: any L2 claim using SumWhere, MeanWhere,
MaxWhere/MinWhere, ArgmaxWhere/ArgminWhere, CountWhere, TopKSumWhere, etc. over a numeric column listed
above will type-check. A claim using a predicate not in the catalog — say Relation (the table has no relational structure)
or ArgmaxWhere on a non-numeric column — has no L2 path; the solver cannot construct Evidence Verified for it, and
the system abstains. The catalog is the table’s L2 commitment boundary: claims inside compose; claims outside abstain.
Adding a new claim shape requires adding a new lift (curation surface), not relaxing the kernel discipline.
E. Tier 1.5 per-claim data, ablations, and pre-registration
E.1. Robustness axes and failure taxonomy
Three robustness axes.
Three additional ablations strengthen the discriminator (full per-claim breakdowns below):
(i) Authority cue. On the no-cue pilot countries-population pilot, prefixing every claim with “According to the table below,
...” rescues some claim shapes (yes/no thresholds, 3-way smallest) but the binary compare V3 C1 (Egypt vs. Yemen,
table-injected) stays 0/3 source-faithful on both Tools-curated and Tools-open with the cue. (ii) Model strength. Haiku 4.5
is fully tool-deferent on Tools rungs (90/90 in every cell); Sonnet 4.6 prior-overrides even with tools (residual concentrated
on countries-pop and Madrid-vs-Berlin GDP). The kernel-vs-baseline gap is therefore largest exactly where parametric
priors are strongest — consistent with Wu et al. (2024) placing Claude with the highest prior retention among frontier
families. (iii) Domain coverage. Under extreme flips, Sonnet prior-override concentrates on country populations only
(other 4 extreme-flip panel domains 100% SF on Tools-curated). Under subtle flips, the same-tool baseline fails on 4 of 5
subtle-flip panel domains on Table-only — multi-domain replication. Tools rescue most subtle-flip failures on Tools rungs;
the kernel closes the residual.
17

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Failure-mode taxonomy.
Of the 6/90 Tools-curated failures on subtle-flip panel Sonnet, all are binary-compare prior-
overrides; EG-VAR resolves them by minting from the attested cell-lookup pair via a per-source ArgmaxWhere-with-
disjunction lift. Cell-lookup and sum-aggregation control claims are 100% source-faithful on every Sonnet rung, including
Table-only — consistent with the literature finding that pure information-retrieval is a weaker prior trigger than relational
comparison.
E.2. Per-(domain, shape) prior-override table
Table 6 reports per-(domain, shape) prior-override counts for Sonnet on the extreme-flip panel (extreme) and subtle-flip
panel (subtle) panels, across Table-only, Tools-curated, and Tools-open. Each cell is pair A PO + pair B PO out of 3
reps each (so 6 trials total per cell). Empty entries are 0/6. This breakdown is what the main text’s “three robustness axes”
paragraph (Section 4.2) summarises.
Panel
Domain
Shape
Table-only PO
Tools-open PO
Tools-curated PO
extreme-flip panel (extreme)
D1 countries-pop
B
3+3
3+3
3+3
D1 countries-pop
D
3+2
3+3
3+2
D1 countries-pop
C
—
—
—
D2-D5 (others)
B/D/C
—
—
—
subtle-flip panel (subtle)
D1 countries-pop
B
3+3
3+0
3+0
D1 countries-pop
D
3+3
—
—
D2 EU area
B
0+3
—
—
D3 city GDP
B
0+3
0+3
0+3
D3 city GDP
D
0+3
—
—
D4 Forbes
B
3+0
—
—
D5 Alpine peaks
B
0+3
—
—
D5 Alpine peaks
D
0+3
—
—
Table 6. Per-(domain, shape) prior-override counts on Sonnet, Tier 1.5 panels extreme-flip panel + subtle-flip panel. Each cell is pair A
+ pair B out of 3 reps each. Domain abbreviations: D1 countries-population, D2 EU country area, D3 European city GDP, D4 Forbes
top global companies, D5 Alpine peaks. Shapes: B binary-compare, D direction (larger/smaller), C cell-lookup or sum control. Reading:
extreme-flip prior-override concentrates on countries-pop only (other 4 extreme-flip panel domains are 100% SF on Sonnet). subtle-flip
prior-override generalises across 4 of 5 subtle-flip panel domains on Table-only; on Tools rungs (with tool access) it survives only on
countries-pop and city-GDP (Madrid vs Berlin), the two strongest- prior-anchor pairs. EG-VAR is 100% source-faithful on the in-calculus
shape-B and shape-C subset across both panels.
What the breakdown reveals.
The narrowing →replication arc the main text claims is visible row-by-row. Under
extreme-flip flips, all PO concentrates on D1 (countries-pop) regardless of rung. Under subtle-flip flips, Table-only PO
spreads to 4 of 5 domains (D1, D2, D3, D5 trip; only D4 is clean on Table-only pair-B but trips on Table-only pair-A); but
tools rescue all PO except on D1 (Egypt-Yemen) and D3 (Madrid-Berlin) — the two canonical strong-prior pairs. The
same-tool baseline is therefore not just bounded but specifically bounded: it converges on the two pairs whose parametric
prior is most entrenched.
E.3. Authority-cue ablation: no-cue pilot vs authority-cued pilot per-claim
Table 7 reports per-claim source-faithful (SF) / prior-override (PO) counts on the no-cue pilot countries-population pilot
without an authority cue (no-cue pilot, 12 base claims) and with an authority cue (authority-cued pilot, “According to the
table below, . . . ” prefix on the same 12 claims). The strongest discriminator is V3 C1 (binary compare “which country has a
larger population: Egypt or Yemen?”), which stays 0/3 SF on every Tools rung even with the cue. EG-VAR goes 3/3 SF on
the same V3 C1 claim (see Section I for the trace).
Why V3 C1 is the canonical hard case.
One natural response to a prior-override finding is “the model was not told to use
the table.” The authority-cued pilot ablation explicitly includes an “according to the table” anchoring cue in the prompt.
Sonnet still selects the prior on V3 C1, 3/3 reps, on both Tools-curated (menu-enforced) and Tools-open (full tool surface).
The kernel discipline closes this gap structurally — not because the LLM understands the cue better, but because the proof
body refine ⟨‘‘yemen’’, . . . ⟩typechecks only when the attestation is yemen.
18

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Claim
Shape
no-cue TC
no-cue TO
cued TC
cued TO
cued T-only
V3 C1
binary-compare
0/3 (3 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
V3 C2
boolean threshold
2/3 (1 PO)
1/3 (2 PO)
3/3 SF
2/3 (1 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
V3 C3
negation compare
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C4
rank position
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C5
3-way compare
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
0/3 (3 PO)
V3 C6
threshold count
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C7
categorical y/n
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C8
ranking
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C9
implicit compare
1/3 (2 PO)
0/3 (3 PO)
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
0/3 (3 PO)
V3 C10
diff vs literal
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C11
cell lookup
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
V3 C12
sum aggregation
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
3/3 SF
Totals
30/36 (83.3%)
28/36 (77.8%)
33/36 (91.7%)
32/36 (88.9%)
23/36 (63.9%)
Table 7. Per-claim source-faithfulness on the countries-population counterfactual pilot, comparing the no-cue baseline with the authority-
cued version (“According to the table below, . . . ” prefix). Columns: TC = Tools-curated, TO = Tools-open, T-only = Table-only. Sonnet
4.6, temperature 0, 3 reps per cell. The cue rescues V3 C2 (boolean threshold) and V3 C9 (implicit direction) on Tools rungs but does not
rescue V3 C1 (binary compare Egypt vs. Yemen) on any rung; Table-only (no tools) is unaffected by the cue’s claim-level intent on the
binary-compare case (V3 C1 still 3 PO) and additionally regresses on V3 C2, V3 C5, and V3 C9 because mental-arithmetic-without-tools
is prior-vulnerable on subtle compares. EG-VAR is 3/3 SF on V3 C1 (Section I) — the strongest possible discriminator.
E.4. Pre-registered success criteria for extreme-flip and subtle-flip panels
The Tier 1.5 extreme-flip panel (extreme flips, 5 domains × 2 pairs × 3 shapes = 30 claims) and subtle-flip panel (subtle
flips, 5 stable-scalar-prior domains, same shape) were each designed with pre-registered success criteria recorded in
specs/tier1-v4-multidomain-panel.md before any runs landed. We reproduce them here so the methodology can be
audited against the result tables.
Pre-registered metric
Criterion
Tools-curated shape-B PO across 5 domains
≥30% of trials, on ≥3/5 domains
Tools-curated shape-C control PO
≤10% of trials (lookup/aggregation stays SF)
EG-VAR shape-B + C source-faithful
≥95% across all domains
Bare-vs-anchored phrasing delta on shape B
if anchored →0% PO on all 5 domains, “kernel discipline” framing
becomes “anti-distractibility” instead
Tools-open ≥Tools-curated in shape-B PO
tool surface is not protective
Outcomes against pre-registration.
The extreme-flip panel failed the first criterion: Tools-curated shape-B PO concen-
trated on 1/5 domains (countries-pop) under extreme flips, not the 3/5 we pre-committed to. We reported this honestly in
the main text (“narrowing” framing in Section 4.2). The failure motivated the subtle-flip panel redesign (subtle flips on
stable-scalar priors), where the criterion lands: subtle-flip panel shape-B PO on Table-only reaches 4/5 domains; on Tools
rungs it drops to 2 specific pairs (Egypt-Yemen + Madrid-Berlin) but the cross- domain replication is visible.
The shape-C control criterion (PO ≤10%) holds in both panels across all rungs.
The EG-VAR ≥95% criterion is met (100% in every cell on the in-calculus shape-B + C subset).
The authority-cue criterion was partially met — anchored phrasing rescued V3 C2 + V3 C9 but not V3 C1; we reframed
the finding as “cue rescues some shapes, not the strongest” rather than recategorising the discriminator (Section E.3).
The Tools-open ≥Tools-curated criterion holds on both panels (Table 6).
F. Tier 1 data: fixture properties and 6-claim differential
F.1. The 6-claim differential: where EG-VAR wins on Tier 1
The Tier 1 ladder gap (EG-VAR 120/120 vs Tools-curated 114/120) is 6 claims at fixed tool surface. Table 8 reports exactly
which 6 claims EG-VAR wins on, what Tools-curated outputs instead, and which failure mode each represents.
19

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
idx
Predicate
Claim (truncated)
Gold
Tools-curated answer
(wrong)
12
PProd
Which time has the lowest local magnitude?
27 nov 1954
08:36 (time-of-day)
24
SumWhere
Total population of regions where Manchu % > threshold
3,123,625,869 153,259,452 (subset
only)
46
CountWhere
How many individuals have “Number” > 1500?
14
40
52
CountWhere
How many parties have > 10% of total votes?
3
4
67
PProd
Difference in goals between top-scoring forward and top-
scoring midfielder
7
6
77
MeanWhere
Average US viewers (millions) for Season 1 episodes
8.45
6.29
Table 8. The 6 Tier 1 claims that distinguish EG-VAR from Tools-curated at fixed tool surface. EG-VAR outputs are kernel-checked
Sigma witnesses matching the curator’s gold; Tools-curated outputs are free-text answers that fail the answer-match judge.
Failure-mode taxonomy of the 6 wins.
Ambiguity (idx 12) — “which time” admits two readings: the date or the
time-of-day. The curator’s typed goal commits to a specific reading (HasProperty e “date” v); Tools-curated picks the
time-of-day reading and fails the answer-match. Kernel discipline + curator’s commitment is what closes this gap, not proof
checking alone — this is the “kernelized fixed-goal discipline at fixed tool surface” framing of the §4 result.
Composition arithmetic (idx 24, 46, 52, 67) — Tools-curated issues a partial tool sequence (one filter or one aggregate)
and emits a free-text answer composed from incomplete evidence. EG-VAR emits the full PProd / SumWhere / CountWhere
proof composing every required attestation; the kernel rejects partial proofs.
Subset confusion (idx 24) — Tools-curated aggregates over the wrong condition subset (the threshold filter is dropped on
one of the two SumWhere components inside the PProd). The kernel-checked proof has both component types fixed by the
curator’s goal, so the solver cannot drop the filter without the proof failing.
Numeric format (idx 77) — Tools-curated reports “6.29” (off-by-one row included; computed mean over the wrong row
set). EG-VAR’s Sigma witness Value.rat (mkRat 169 20) = 8.45 is the correctly-typed exact-rational answer.
These six claims — not the abstract architectural argument — are what the 5 pp Tier 1 gap actually is. Each is a place where
the curator’s typed goal makes the right answer derivable and the free-text baseline does not enforce that constraint.
F.2. Tier 1 fixture properties
We summarise the Tier 1 fixture composition:
Property
Value
Claims
120
Tables
120 (one claim per table)
PProd-composed claims
15 (12.5%)
PLift-using claims (arithmetic identity)
14 (11.7%)
Evidence count per claim (median / max)
1 / 4
Mean evidence count
1.1
L2 predicate distribution.
The headline predicate covers the following Tier 1 claim shapes:
L2 predicate
Claims
%
CountWhere
32
26.7%
MeanWhere
32
26.7%
SumWhere
22
18.3%
ArgmaxWhere
19
15.8%
MaxWhere
9
7.5%
ArgminWhere
3
2.5%
TopKSumByWhere
1
0.8%
MinWhere
1
0.8%
HasProperty
1
0.8%
20

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Coverage and limits.
The fixture is biased toward single-shot aggregations (88% of claims have evidence-count = 1), with
PProd composition tested explicitly on the 15 multi-evidence cases ( 12.5%). Tier 1 is constructed for breadth across L2
predicate shapes (9 distinct predicates) at relatively shallow composition depth. Deeper composition (PProd of 4+ evidence
with PLift arithmetic identities, e.g., Section O) appears in 11.7% of claims. Tier 2 (Section 4.3) exercises the same fixture
under LLM formalization; deeper composition remains a target for future work.
G. Reproducibility and formalization provenance
G.1. Reproduction artifacts
• Code
supplement:
https://github.com/7pocheR/eg-var
(pinned
commit
88160519ce03dbd824f62799c1d3e1a02794a6e8; Lean 4 library, Python runtime, trust-artifact JSONs, 11
replay fixtures, runner scripts for E1–E4; see README).
• Reproduction scripts (Tier 1):
run dg eval.py, run di baseline.py, run dj no tools.py;
Tier 1.5:
test counterfactual.py,
test counterfactual dg.py,
test counterfactual dj.py,
all
under
scripts/tier1/.
• Logs
written
by
the
runners
above:
results/tier1 {dg,di strict,di loose,dj} *.jsonl
(E1),
results/cf v{4,45} *.tsv (E2), results/tier2 *.jsonl (E3), results/cf v4 tier2 *.jsonl (E4).
• Models: claude-sonnet-4-6, claude-haiku-4-5-20251001, and claude-opus-4-7 (Tier 2 capability-scaling),
temperature 0, identical prompt scaffolding across rungs.
Replay audit gate.
Every generated Lean module at results/generated/pipeline <hash>.lean can be replay-
audited post-hoc by the standalone script verify axioms.py. The script parses the #print axioms claim proof
output and checks the dependency closure against the whitelist buckets used in our analysis: (i) the fixed EG-VAR prelude,
(ii) Lean 4 standard core axioms (Classical.choice, Quot.sound, propext), (iii) runtime-emitted observation-leaf
schemas matching obsN * or {table,stats}Tool (full emission-site table in Table 9), and (iv) the per-source lift prefix
lift <sourceHash> *. The trust-artifact discipline requires either mkVerified (attestation path) or at least one runtime
leaf together with at least one per-source lift (the direct-evidence lift path per Section 3.2). Any axiom outside these
buckets, or any sorry/sorryAx in the closure, fails the audit. The primary safety gate at generation time is the Lean kernel
call inside pipeline.py (through lake env lean); the replay audit is an additional artifact-level check that any third
party holding the generated module bundle and the Lean toolchain can re-run via python -m runtime.verify axioms,
without invoking any LLM or re-running the analyst/formalizer/solver roles.
G.2. Formalization provenance
This subsection expands the main-text summary at Section 3.6. We document the curation pipelines explicitly because any
reader of Theorem 3.1 must distinguish runtime-minted trust artifacts from pre-committed ones.
Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 fixtures (data/tier1 gold formalizations.json, data/tier1 table formalizations.json).
These fixtures supply the pipeline-produced, fixture-committed goal type τ gold and the per-source audited formalization
Λ(s) for every claim in the four-rung ladder (Sections 4.1 and 4.2). Each entry was produced by an automated subagent
pipeline frozen per git commit:
1. Proposer (Claude Sonnet subagent, temperature 0, frozen prompt): drafts a candidate Lean goal type and per-table
menu, reading only the raw TableBench row data and column headers.
2. Critic (Codex GPT-5.4 subagent, separate session per batch): reviews for anti-cheating violations, shape correctness
relative to the claim, and R10 menu soundness per Section 3.5.
3. Kernel typecheck (lake env lean): gates inclusion; any entry whose declared type fails the Lean elaborator is
rejected and returned to the proposer.
4. Human meta-supervision: a single human (the author) reviewed batch-level acceptance rates and systemic failure
categories (e.g., “pipeline emits raw <<col>> while lift canonicalizes” as a structural bug), but did not edit any
individual formalization. No per-entry manual fixes; all fixture content descends from the proposer–critic–kernel loop.
21

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
At fixture close the two JSON files are frozen under the commit hash reported in Section G. Curator yield (entries that
survived stages 1–3) was 120/120 for Tier 1 and 30/30 per panel for Tier 1.5, covering shape-B (binary-compare), shape-
C (cell-lookup), and shape-D (categorical-direction) claims. Shape-D claims reuse the shape-B formalization plus a
deterministic post-processor; no kernel extension is required.
Working dictionary (formalizer state).
The formalizer is memoryless across claims but has access to a working dictionary
of Property, Entity, and Convention entries accumulated from prior formalizations and from the analyst pass on the current
source. Dictionary entries record canonical column names, value formats, and known encoding conventions. The dictionary
is a curator-controlled cross-claim memory; it does not give the formalizer access to the gold answer or solver-side
information.
Tier 2 evaluation.
The Tier 2 runtime passes the natural-language claim to an LLM formalizer at generation time, with
access to the same per-source menu Λ(s) (as a trust artifact, not as feedback) but no gold goal type. The formalizer proposes
its own τ LLM; the solver then attempts a proof against that type; the kernel accepts only whitelist- compliant proofs.
Section 4.3 reports the resulting semantic-faithfulness decomposition on n=120 TableBench claims.
What Λ(s) is and what it is not.
The per-source menu Λ(s) is the curator’s interpretive commitment that a given tool’s
L1 output (e.g., CountCells) lifts to a specific L2 world-property predicate (e.g., CountWhere) on this source. It is not a
semantic certificate: a wrong but audited lift can still certify a wrong formalized claim, as we document in Section 5.1(ii).
The provenance chain terminates at the proposer–critic–kernel loop above; the audit at that loop is the trust artifact. We use
the term “audited per-source formalization” throughout to keep the term separable from semantic-faithfulness claims.
What prevents formalizer collusion.
At evaluation time the Tier 1/1.5 runtime loads τ gold from the frozen fixture and
never invokes the formalizer role. The kernel-trusted prelude, Λ(s), and the runtime-minted observation leaves are the only
axiom sources (Section 3.6); the solver writes only the tactic body. Consequently, no information from the gold answer or
curator’s adjudicated reading enters the claim proof at runtime — only pre-committed artifacts do.
H. Worked Tier 1 examples: end-to-end trace
H.1. HIV argmax via state projection
Suppose the claim is “Which state has the highest HIV incidence rate?”. EG-VAR proceeds: (1) The solver requests the
per-source operation argmax with id on column “incidence rate”. (2) The runtime executes the operation and returns
an attested payload Attested T q p that contains the maximum value v, the row handle r at which it occurs, and a
cell projection CellAt r “state” “alabama”. (3) The kernel’s interpretation function lifts the payload to two L2 facts:
MaxCell ‘‘incidence’’ c r v and CellAt r ‘‘state’’ ‘‘alabama’’. (4) The per-source lift composes them:
axiom hiv_lift_argmax_via_state_proj
(col : String) (c : Cond) (r : RowHandle)
(name : String) (v : Value) :
Evidence Verified (MaxCell col c r v) ->
Evidence Verified
(CellAt r "state" (Value.str name)) ->
Evidence Verified
(ArgmaxWhere col c name v)
(5) The solver writes a refine tactic with witness "alabama" and applies the per-source lift; the kernel mints an
Evidence Verified witness for ArgmaxWhere "incidence" c "alabama" v, and the Sigma witness “alabama” is
the certified answer.
Identity in EG-VAR rides on names rather than category-kinds: “alabama” is a String, not an inhabitant of an opaque
State type. This is the nominalist choice (Quine, 1969; Burgess & Rosen, 1997) — identity-bearers are the names the table
actually emits, so audit proceeds by comparing strings rather than inferring category membership. The kernel never has to
commit to an ontology of states; the curator commits to a column whose values are the identifiers, and the lift makes that
commitment typed and inspectable.
A per-source lift is table-specific (it encodes the curator’s commitment that “state” is the row-identifying column for this
22

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
particular table) but claim-generic (parametric over measure column, condition, entity name, and value, so a single lift
covers many argmax claims). Lifts are audited once per source then trusted kernel-side for all subsequent claims over that
source. Absence of a matching lift is a feature: the solver has no L2 proof path, the kernel rejects, and the system abstains
rather than silently guessing. The guarantee is conditional: a semantically wrong audited lift can still produce a verified
output for a formalized claim that the lift’s semantics admit. EG-VAR rules out unsupported claims between tool and output;
it does not eliminate curator error in the trust artifact itself.
This is the concrete protocol behind our claim that the formalization barrier in empirical reasoning is a curation gap, not
an expressive limit (Section 1). The L1/L2 separation is portable: knowledge graphs, SQL views, JSON APIs, and sensor
streams admit the same per-source-lift pattern. We sketch the generalization in Section 5.2.
H.2. Full Tier 1 trace
We walk through a single Tier 1 claim from natural-language input to kernel-checked Sigma witness, to make the architec-
ture’s per-step trust commitments concrete.
Claim and goal type.
“Which crater has the largest diameter?” over the lunar-crater table. The fixture-committed Lean
goal (in Lean’s dependent-sum notation):
Sigma (e : String), Sigma (v : Value),
Evidence Verified
(ArgmaxWhere c_diameter
Cond.all e v)
where c diameter = "diameter (km)". The Sigma binders make the certified answer the witness e (Martin-L¨of, 1984);
the surface answer is the first projection.
Step 1 (solver →runtime).
The solver issues the structured action {action:
‘‘stats’’, operation:
‘‘argmax with id’’, column:
‘‘diameter (km)’’, identity column:
‘‘name’’}.
Step 2 (runtime →attested payload).
The runtime executes the operation deterministically against the table; it returns an
Attested T q p witness with payload {MAXROW: cleopatra, MAXVALUE: VALUE.RAT (MKRAT 78 1)}.
Step 3 (interp T →L1 facts).
The interpretation function for argmax with id reads the attested payload into two typed
L1 storage facts: MaxCell ‘‘diameter (km)’’ Cond.all 78 (the maximum value at the storage layer) and CellAt r
‘‘name’’ (Value.str ‘‘cleopatra’’) (the identity-column value at row r).
Step 4 (per-source lift →L2 claim).
The lunar-crater argmax via name proj lift composes the two L1 facts and emits
the L2 claim Evidence Verified (ArgmaxWhere ‘‘diameter (km)’’ Cond.all ‘‘cleopatra’’ 78). The lift
is the curator’s interpretive commitment that “name” is the row-identifying column for this table.
Step
5
(solver
→
proof
term).
The
solver
writes
refine ⟨‘‘cleopatra’’, ..., ? ⟩; exact
argmax via name proj ...; the kernel type-checks and the Sigma witness “cleopatra” is extracted as the certi-
fied answer.
The generated Lean file is the replay artifact (G1 in Section 5.2); the audit cost is the per-source lift audit, paid once and
reused.
I. Failure cases and formalizer-design notes
I.1. V3 C1 (Egypt-vs-Yemen): baseline prior-override
Setup. Synthetic counterfactual countries-population table: Egypt’s july 1, 2013 projection cell overwritten to 12
(real ∼85M). Yemen unchanged at ∼25M. Question: “Which country has a larger population: Egypt or Yemen?”.
Sonnet Tools-curated trace (3/3 prior-override). The model issues a cell lookup for Egypt, receives 12; issues a
cell lookup for Yemen, receives 25252000; then answers “Egypt”. The tool returns the source values; the model overrides
them. The same pattern occurs across all three reps.
23

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
EG-VAR (3/3 source-faithful). The kernel mints an Evidence Verified witness from the per-source argmax-with-
disjunction lift on the attested payload. The solver writes refine ⟨‘‘yemen’’, ...⟩; exact .... The Sigma witness
“yemen” is the certified answer.
Authority-cue ablation (authority-cued pilot). Prefixing the question with “According to the table below, ...” rescues
V3 C2 (boolean threshold) and V3 C9 (implicit direction) on Tools-curated but does not rescue V3 C1 (still 3/3 prior-
override). The cue is not strong enough to override the parametric prior on famous-entity populations; the kernel attestation
is.
I.2. Formalizer failures: runtime-vs-fixture delta (Tier 2)
Section 4.3 reports the end-to-end Tier 2 decomposition at n=120; this appendix zooms in on the five Sonnet cases
where the runtime formalization diverged materially from the fixture-standard goal type. Four produce kernel-accepted
but answer-divergent output (B5b); one aborts the formalizer pass (B7). We present each as a structured delta, organised
by the compositional axis along which the divergence occurred. Cases classified B5a (recorded ambiguity) and B5c
(benchmark-artifact issue) are excluded here; they are presented case-by-case in the main-text Table 5 caption and do not
represent formalizer-attributable error.
Across these five cases, the common pattern is that the formalizer makes a local-reading decision at a composition node
(which Cond constructor, which column, whether to include a TopK constraint) that a curator with the claim and the fixture-
standard formalization in front of them would have taken differently. Each case is addressable by supervised fine-tuning on
fixture (claim, gold lean goal type) pairs or RL with a gold-answer reward; we discuss the direction at the end of the
section.
I.3. Composite-column matching strategy (idx 50)
Claim.
“How many hurricanes occurred in the month of September?”
Delta.
Column month contains date-string values of the form ‘‘September 1979’’, ‘‘October 1988’’, etc. (month-
plus-year strings). Fixture uses Cond.propContains:
CountWhere "month"
(Cond.propContains "month" (Value.str "September"))
ans
Runtime formalizer chose Cond.propEq:
CountWhere "month"
(Cond.propEq "month" (Value.str "September"))
ans
Runtime answer: 9. Fixture answer: 19. The formalizer’s ambiguous terms field recorded the choice explicitly as
“Cond.propEq — exact match”. The kernel accepted the proof under the LLM’s chosen reading; the L1 tool correctly
returned count = 9 for strict equality with the literal string ‘‘September’’, which matches zero month = "September
..." rows in the table.
Character of the error.
The formalizer recognised the existence of a matching-strategy decision, logged it, and picked
the strategy whose answer would be correct only if the month column’s values were bare month names. It did not use the
column’s actual value format (exposed by the analyst’s reading guide) to discriminate.
I.4. Dropped TopK constraint (idx 61)
Claim.
“What is the average market value of the top 5 companies in the oil and gas industry?”
Delta.
Fixture uses TopKMeanWhere, which the per-source menu includes for this column:
TopKMeanWhere "market value (billion )" 5
(Cond.propEq "industry" (Value.str "oil and gas"))
ans
24

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Runtime formalizer dropped the top-5 constraint and used plain MeanWhere:
MeanWhere "market value (billion )"
(Cond.propEq "industry" (Value.str "oil and gas"))
ans
Runtime answer: 1208/5. Fixture answer: 276.06. The formalizer’s ambiguous terms names the phrase “top 5 companies
in the oil and gas industry” and records the chosen formalization as MeanWhere, so the dropped TopK was deliberate, not an
oversight.
Character of the error.
The formalizer treated “top 5” as rhetorical rather than compositional. The per-source menu
includes TopKMeanWhere for this column; the formalizer’s compositional-operator selection step did not consult it.
I.5. Column disambiguation (idx 67)
Claim.
“What is the difference in total goals scored by the top-scoring forward (fw) and the top-scoring midfielder (mf) in
the league?”
Delta.
Table has both a league goals column and a total goals column. Claim literally says “total goals”. Fixture
uses total goals:
MaxWhere "total goals" (Cond.propEq "position" "fw") a
... MaxWhere "total goals" (Cond.propEq "position" "mf") b
... (PLift (ans = a - b))
Runtime formalizer picked league goals:
MaxWhere "league goals" (Cond.propEq "position" "fw") a
... MaxWhere "league goals" (Cond.propEq "position" "mf") b
Runtime answer: 6. Fixture answer: 7.
Character of the error.
Column-selection under near-synonym ambiguity, where the claim’s exact wording (“total goals”)
is the dispositive signal. The formalizer’s properties needed did not enumerate a candidate-set check against the claim’s
noun phrase.
I.6. Condition-conjunct erasure and self-inconsistency (idx 94)
Claim.
“What is the average prominence of mountain peaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that have an
elevation of at least 3000 meters?”
Delta.
Fixture:
MeanWhere "prominence (m)"
(Cond.and
(Cond.propContains "country"
(Value.str "democratic republic of the congo"))
(Cond.propGte "elevation (m)"
(Value.rat (mkRat 3000 1))))
ans
Runtime formalizer:
MeanWhere "prominence (m)"
(Cond.and
(Cond.propGte "elevation (m)"
(Value.rat (mkRat 3000 1)))
(Cond.propGte "col (m)"
(Value.rat (mkRat 0 1))))
ans
25

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
The country filter is absent; the second conjunct is col (m) ≥0 (trivially true on this table).
The formal-
izer’s ambiguous terms field claims the chosen filter is Cond.propEq "country" "democratic republic of the
congo" — but this constructor does not appear in the emitted lean goal type. Runtime answer: 14075/6; fixture answer:
2606.25.
Character of the error.
Self-inconsistency between the formalizer’s self-reported decision (ambiguous terms) and
the actual lean goal type it emitted. A post-formalizer consistency pass — verifying every adjudication recorded in
ambiguous terms is reflected in the emitted goal — would catch this class mechanically at audit time. We list this as a
near-term infrastructure improvement in Section 5.3.
I.7. Compositional-complexity abort (idx 34)
Claim.
“What is the total number of medals (M36 + M36B1 + M36B2) earned from May 1944 to August 1944?”
Delta.
Fixture is a 4-level dependent sum:
Sigma ans, Sigma a, Sigma b, Sigma c,
PProd (SumWhere "m36"
<4-way month or> a)
(PProd (SumWhere "m36b1" <same or> b)
(PProd (SumWhere "m36b2" <same or> c)
(PLift (ans.asRat = a.asRat + b.asRat + c.asRat))))
The fixture formalization composes three separate measure columns with a 4-way disjunction over the month column and a
3-term arithmetic combining the resulting witnesses. Runtime formalizer emitted an empty lean goal type and aborted
on its first attempt; the pipeline returned ABSTAIN rather than a wrong formalization.
Character of the error.
Compositional complexity boundary: the claim requires simultaneous choices across three
dimensions (measure column, filter disjunction width, arithmetic composition shape) in a single pass. The formalizer’s
single-pass architecture is not expressive enough to emit this class of goal reliably. Note that this is the desirable failure
mode: no silent-wrong, no Verified output with the wrong answer. The system abstained honestly; the downstream consumer
sees ABSTAIN and can route elsewhere.
We note that the decomposer + binder two-stage formalizer pattern — splitting the goal into per-measure sub-claims and
composing them via a binder role — is a natural architectural response to this class; we describe it in Section 5.3 as future
work.
I.8. Taxonomy and improvement direction
The five cases partition into five orthogonal compositional axes of the formalizer’s output: matching strategy (idx 50),
operator selection (idx 61), column selection (idx 67), condition-conjunct preservation (idx 94), and compositional arity
(idx 34). Three of these (idx 50, 61, 67) are local decisions: each resolves to a choice among a small candidate set that is
determined by the claim’s wording together with local information already available to the formalizer (column-value format
for idx 50; per-source menu for idx 61; claim noun phrase for idx 67). Case idx 94 is a consistency gap between two of the
formalizer’s own outputs. Case idx 34 is a capacity limit rather than a reading error.
Near-term infrastructure improvements.
The idx 94 self-inconsistency case is mechanically detectable: verifying
agreement between each entry of ambiguous terms.chosen and the emitted lean goal type is a deterministic post-
formalizer audit that would convert this failure mode into an ABSTAIN or a retry. We list this as future work rather than a
claimed feature.
RL fine-tuning of the formalizer.
Each of the four reading-error cases (idx 50, 61, 67, 94) is a single-claim adjudication
where the fixture’s lean goal type supplies a ground-truth choice at exactly the compositional node where the runtime
formalizer diverged. The fixture, documented with provenance in Section 3.6, therefore supplies a structured supervised-fine-
tuning corpus of (claim, analyst-guide, per-source menu, gold lean goal type) tuples. A natural next step is to fine-tune a
formalizer model on this corpus, either supervised or with a verifier-based RL loop where the reward is kernel acceptance
against the fixture goal type. The verifier is already on hand: it is the same kernel the paper uses to certify production
26

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
outputs. This produces a formalizer whose local reading decisions converge to the curator’s, without weakening any of the
runtime trust properties established in Section 3.6.
Why this is compatible with the paper’s safety claims.
Fine-tuning the formalizer is an accuracy intervention, not a
safety intervention: Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 are properties of the runtime + kernel, invariant under any formalizer. A
fine-tuned formalizer changes the VERIFIED/ABSTAIN split favorably without changing the no-silent-wrong guarantee.
J. Abstention case study
Setup. A Tier 1 claim whose goal type required a per-source topk sum by lift over a measure column not registered in the
curator’s lift menu for that table.
EG-VAR outcome. The kernel rejects every proof attempt: no L2 fact unifies with the goal vocabulary because the lift
menu has no matching entry. The system reports ABSTAIN with the unsatisfied goal type.
Tools baseline outcome. The same-tool baseline calls a related stats operation, receives a numeric value, and emits a
free-text answer that happens to match the gold (a partial correctness coincidence; the operation called was not the one the
gold formalization required). Verified-wrong vs verified-right is indistinguishable downstream without a kernel-checked
proof.
Governance reading. EG-VAR’s abstention is machine-actionable (G3 in Section 5.2); the baseline’s “answer” is opaque.
The trade-off is honest: EG-VAR loses one match-counted claim, but the failure mode is structurally typed.
K. Per-source formalization: theory anchors
K.1. Robustness hierarchy
The argument that records-vs-entities is hierarchical, not categorical (Section 3.2), can be made precise. Storage features that
hold prior to any interpretive commitment: same-row entries share a row-anchor, same-column entries share a column-anchor.
Layering interpretive commitments on these invariants yields a four-level hierarchy of per-source formalizations:
Level
Commitment
L2 vocabulary unlocked
1. Aggregate-only
none beyond layout
SumWhere,
CountWhere,
MeanWhere,
MaxWhere, MinWhere
2. Row-cell facts
rows have stable handles
row-anchored cell lookup
3. Entity-anchored rows are entities; col X gives names HasProperty, ArgmaxWhere, EntitySum
4. Relational
both axes entity-identified
Relation, matchup-style
Each level’s commitments include those above. A record table stops at level 1; an entity table reaches level 3; a matchup
table reaches level 4. Same kernel, same L1/L2 split, same ontology — different stopping points on a single hierarchy.
“Fail-closed for mismatched claims” becomes a hierarchy property: a claim requiring level-3 commitments against a level-1
table has no L2 fact to unify against, so the pipeline abstains.
K.2. Rank as interpretation: gauge freedom
A given dataset admits multiple consistent rank interpretations. A matchup table can be formalized as Result : Player →
Player →Outcome (rank-2 curried), Result′ : Player × Player →Outcome (rank-2 uncurried), or MatchOutcome :
Match →Outcome where Match := Player × Player (rank-1 with composite domain). All three encode the same function
and are type-isomorphic in any Cartesian closed setting (Mac Lane, 1971).
Rank-shifting interpretations across the lambda calculus reduce to currying/uncurrying, which Lean 4 makes definitionally
transparent (A →B →C is sugar for A →(B →C)). The kernel does not need to commit to “the true rank” of a table; it
accepts any consistent per-source lift catalogue. Other examples of the same ambiguity:
• Time series. Rank-1 (time →value) vs rank-2 with channels (time × channel →value).
• Pixel grid. Rank-2 (row × col →intensity) vs rank-3 (row × col × channel →value).
27

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
• RDF triples. Rank-1 over triples; rank-2 (subject, predicate) →object; rank-3 (subject, predicate, object) →{true,
false}.
• Relational tables with primary key. Rank-1 over rows-as- records vs rank-2 (row, column) →cell.
These are not subjective conventions but type isomorphisms. The curator’s job is to pick an interpretation that fits the
anticipated claims and audit the lift menu under it; the kernel’s job is to accept any consistent commitment.
K.3. The scaling argument: formalization gap shrinks as sources become formal
The empirical results in Section 4 are bounded by the formalization burden of CSV-style sources. As data substrates evolve
toward typed interfaces, the formalizer’s job shrinks while the kernel guarantee stays the same:
Substrate
Formalization burden
CSV
Column names are strings; values are free text. Maximal lift authoring per
source.
SQL view
Schema is typed, values structured. Lift catalog auto-generates from view
definitions.
OpenAPI
Typed inputs/outputs in spec. Lift = adapter from spec types to L2 ontology.
Knowledge graph
Entities + relations already typed. Lift = direct projection from RDF to L2.
Lean / formal source
Zero gap; compose proofs directly.
In the limit of fully formal sources, the LLM operates entirely within the formal world, the kernel guarantee is vacuous
(because the substrate is already typed), and EG-VAR collapses to LLM-driven theorem proving with attested premises.
The architecture is designed to interpolate: the same kernel + lift discipline runs across the substrate spectrum. We expect
the kernel-vs-baseline gap on real-world deployments to narrow over time as data sources adopt structured interfaces, not
because models improve, but because the formalization burden moves to the source curator and out of the inference path.
L. Tier 2 reporting taxonomy and capability-scaling check
This appendix expands the main-text table caption at Table 5 and reports the Opus capability-scaling check.
Category definitions.
Categories are mutually exclusive and sum to 120. B1: kernel-accepted, type matches gold, answer
matches gold. B4: kernel-accepted, type differs from gold but answer matches. B5a (ambiguous claim, logged): kernel-
accepted divergent answer under a defensible alternative reading that the formalizer logged in ambiguous terms. B5b
(semantic formalizer error): pure formalizer error (wrong column, dropped constraint, composite-value matching-strategy
error) — kernel still accepts the proof, but of a mis-formalized goal. B5c (benchmark gold error, surfaced): audited
benchmark-artifact case (source-table HTML leakage, or arithmetic error in benchmark gold) that the system exposes rather
than propagates; see Section I.2. B6: kernel-rejected, honest abstention. B3: solver exhausted tactic retries with type
matching gold. B7: formalizer aborted.
Reading the decomposition.
The key Tier 2 number is the pure end-to-end formalizer-error rate, not the flat disagreement
rate. On Sonnet, only 4/120 cases are bona fide formalizer mistakes (B5b). The remaining divergences are auditable: 5
logged alternative readings (B5a), 2 surfaced benchmark-artifact issues (B5c), 3 honest abstentions (B6), and 5 solver or
formalizer ceilings (B3+B7). Unlike B5b, B5a and B5c are explicit, inspectable disagreements rather than silent system
error: each B5a entry’s alternative-reading choice is logged in ambiguous terms by the formalizer, and each B5c entry is
an audited case study in Section I.2. Treating logged ambiguities separately raises auditable agreement to 88.3%; adding
surfaced benchmark-artifact issues yields 90.0%.
Capability-scaling check.
As a robustness check on the claim that residual formalizer error is capability-limited, we
evaluate the stronger Opus model on the 9 Sonnet residual indices (B3/B7 or B5b). Opus converts four B3/B7 cases to
accepted answer-matches and one B5b case to honest abstention; two B5b cases persist. The formalizer-error rate on this
residual subset halves from 4/9 to 2/9; the theorem-level safety invariant is unchanged under either formalizer.
28

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
M. Scope limits and future extensions
This appendix expands the main-text summaries at Sections 5.1 and 5.3.
M.1. Limitations
(i) Formalizer scope. Tier 1 and Tier 1.5 bypass the NL-to-Lean formalizer step by loading fixture-committed gold typed
goals (Section 3.6); they evaluate the safety and source-faithfulness properties under ideal formalization. Tier 2 (Section 4.3)
removes that bypass and evaluates the LLM formalizer end-to-end. The 3-blind-formalizer consensus design is implemented
in the runtime but not evaluated here; we defer the consensus study to future work.
(ii) Trust artifacts. Tools, per-source lifts, and the L1 adapter are trusted (auditable but not type-checked end-to-end). A
semantically wrong audited lift can certify a wrong formalized claim; EG-VAR rules out unsupported claims between tool
and output, not curator error in the trust artifact itself (Section 3.5).
(iii) Single-source scope. All evaluations are over single TableBench tables. Multi-source conflict, retrieval over distributed
KGs, and time-varying sources are out of scope; we list near-term extensions below.
(v) World inconsistency containment. The implementation realizes Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 structurally; the
companion world-inconsistency-containment property relies on the WProp ̸→Prop phase separation in the current Lean
encoding; we treat it as implementation detail, not a main-text theorem.
M.2. Future work scoped to governance reach
Fine-tuning the NL formalizer. Tier 2 (Section 4.3) reports residual semantic formalizer error at 3.3% (Sonnet) / 1.7%
(Opus). Each of the 4 Sonnet B5b cases is a single-claim adjudication where the fixture supplies a ground-truth choice
at exactly the compositional node where the runtime formalizer diverged, and the curator pipeline (Section 3.6) already
provides a structured SFT / RL corpus. Fine-tuning a formalizer on this corpus, with kernel acceptance as the reward signal,
is an accuracy intervention that tightens the residual rate without weakening Theorem 3.1; the verifier is already on hand — it
is the same kernel the paper uses to certify production outputs. A 3-blind-formalizer consensus gate is similarly implemented
but not evaluated here; we expect it to convert a further fraction of silent B5b mistakes into honest B6 abstentions.
Conflicting sources. Multi-source attestation introduces conflict between attested storage facts. The grade calculus admits
explicit conflict-downgrade rules (VERIFIED →SUPPORTED on detected disagreement); empirical evaluation is future
work.
Cross-substrate panel. Replicating the source-faithfulness discriminator on KG-grounded and SQL-grounded claims would
directly test the L1/L2 portability claim (Section 5.2).
N. Theoretical anchors deferred from the main text
The main text uses a selected set of theoretical anchors as Justification Anchors and Lineage Paragraphs (Martin-L¨of,
Curry–Howard, Codd, Mac Lane, Quine, Burgess–Rosen, Raggi, Bundy, Clarke, Lahiri, Artemov, Fine, Green). The
following anchors connect to the same design choices but are deferred here for space:
Source semantics and naming.
Cooper (2012) (Type Theory with Records, TTR) gives a type-theoretic substrate for
situated semantics that resembles our per-source-formalization commitment. Montague (1973) established that the natural-
language →formal-meaning gap admits a typed denotational treatment, the genealogy of our claim formalization. Barwise &
Perry (1983) (situation semantics) treats situations as first-class typed objects, the same move as our per-source formalization.
Earlier in the lineage, Frege (1892) distinguished sense and reference — a distinction EG-VAR’s name-as-string discipline
collapses by choosing reference fixed at the storage layer. Following Kripke (1980) on rigid designators, our choice of
name- columns as identity-bearers is the operational analogue of name- rigidity at the trust boundary. Donnellan (1966)
distinguishes referential and attributive uses of definite descriptions; EG-VAR’s lift menu enforces the referential reading
(“the row whose name-column is X”).
Uncertainty and conflict.
Future multi-source evaluation opens connections to Belnap (1977) four-valued paraconsistent
logic, Anderson & Belnap (1975) relevance/relevant logic, and Jøsang (2016) subjective-logic continuous-confidence.
29

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Caminada & Amgoud (2007) ASPIC+ structured argumentation gives a substrate for grade-aware retraction under contra-
diction. Doyle (1979) JTMS truth-maintenance systems are the classical dependency-graph substrate for provenance-tracked
retraction. Alchourr´on et al. (1985) AGM belief revision frames the multi-source contradiction problem. EG-VAR’s grade
calculus accommodates these via the conflict-downgrade rules sketched in Section 5.3.
Optional / cautious anchors.
Univalence in homotopy type theory (The Univalent Foundations Program, 2013) would
give a principled account of equivalence classes of source formalizations (different rank readings, different lift catalogs); we
mention this as a future- work analogy rather than a current design basis. Reliabilist epistemology (Goldman, 1979) grounds
our “verified by reliable process” framing of VERIFIED evidence. Attribute-based access control (Hu et al., 2014) and typed
semistructured data (Abiteboul et al., 2000) are the systems analogues of EG-VAR’s per-source-formalization protocol.
Soundness over internal completeness.
The kernel does not relate semantically equivalent L2 predicates by general
lemmas: there is no built-in MeanWhere c v ⇔∃s, n. SumWhere c s ∧CountWhere c n ∧v = s/n. Equivalences are
localized in the per-source tools and lifts, where they are computed directly and audited offline; the kernel’s proof search
stays decidable and its proof traces stay small enough to inspect. This is the same fragmentation move that gives us decidable
fragments of first-order logic, theory combination in SMT, and description logics: trade FOL completeness for tractable,
auditable per-theory reasoning. Raggi et al. (2016) formalize precisely this: representation matters in proof, and semantically
equivalent encodings can carry very different proof-engineering costs.
O. Worked Tier 1 examples: cross-tribunal PProd composition
The lunar-craters argmax in Section H exercises a single tool call and a single per-source lift. We now walk through a
substantially more complex Tier 1 claim: a four-tool, four-evidence, PProd-composed claim with an arithmetic identity
between the witnesses. This is representative of the multi-shot composition shapes we curated in Tier 1’s PProd cluster.
Source.
TableBench table 4fbaad0b... (Spanish-Inquisition-tribunal autos da f´e records). Relevant excerpt:
Tribunal
Autos da f´e
Exec. persona
Exec. effigie
Penanced
Barcelona
8
1
1
15
Valencia
4
2
0
49
C´ordoba
13
17
19
125
Cuenca
7
7
10
35
...
Claim.
“How much greater is the total number of executions (in persona and in effigie) in C´ordoba compared to
Valencia?” The arithmetic answer is (17 + 19) −(2 + 0) = 34.
Per-source tool menu.
For this table the curator registered, among others:
• stats sum strict on column “executions in persona”
• stats sum strict on column “executions in effigie”
• Each accepts a Cond.propEq on the “tribunal” identity column.
The tool menu is the audit surface; a claim that requires a predicate not in the menu fails closed.
Lean goal type (fixture-committed).
Sigma (ans : Value),
Sigma (a1 : Value), Sigma (a2 : Value),
Sigma (b1 : Value), Sigma (b2 : Value),
PProd
(Evidence Verified
(SumWhere "executions in persona"
(Cond.propEq "tribunal"
30

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
(Value.str "cordoba")) a1))
(PProd
(Evidence Verified
(SumWhere "executions in effigie"
(Cond.propEq "tribunal"
(Value.str "cordoba")) a2))
(PProd
(Evidence Verified
(SumWhere "executions in persona"
(Cond.propEq "tribunal"
(Value.str "valencia")) b1))
(PProd
(Evidence Verified
(SumWhere "executions in effigie"
(Cond.propEq "tribunal"
(Value.str "valencia")) b2))
(PLift (ans.asRat =
(a1.asRat + a2.asRat) -
(b1.asRat + b2.asRat))))))
The five Sigma binders fix: the surface answer ans, plus four numeric witnesses for the four sum sub-claims. The final
PLift is the kernel-checked arithmetic identity that ties the witnesses to ans.
Solver action sequence (4 tool calls).
{ "action": "stats", "operation": "sum",
"column": "Executions in persona",
"condition": { "op": "eq",
"property": "Tribunal", "value": "cordoba" } }
{ "action": "stats", "operation": "sum",
"column": "Executions in effigie",
"condition": { "op": "eq",
"property": "Tribunal", "value": "cordoba" } }
{ "action": "stats", "operation": "sum",
"column": "Executions in persona",
"condition": { "op": "eq",
"property": "Tribunal", "value": "valencia" } }
{ "action": "stats", "operation": "sum",
"column": "Executions in effigie",
"condition": { "op": "eq",
"property": "Tribunal", "value": "valencia" } }
Tool attestations.
The runtime returns Attested T payloads: a1 = 17 (C´ordoba persona, single-row sum), a2 = 19
(C´ordoba effigie), b1 = 2 (Valencia persona), b2 = 0 (Valencia effigie).
L2 evidence via per-source lifts.
Each attested payload is lifted via the stats sum strict per-source lift, which takes
the L1 column-strict sum attestation and the Cond.propEq discriminator and produces an L2 SumWhere witness. The four
lift applications produce obs0 l2, obs1 l2, obs2 l2, obs3 l2, each typed as Evidence Verified (SumWhere ...)
with the right column/condition/value triple.
Solver proof body.
refine 〈Value.rat (mkRat 34 1),
obs0_val, obs1_val,
obs2_val, obs3_val, ?_〉
refine PProd.mk obs0_l2
(PProd.mk obs1_l2
(PProd.mk obs2_l2
(PProd.mk obs3_l2
(PLift.up ?_))))
native_decide
31

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
The first refine fills the five Sigma binders: the surface answer is Value.rat (mkRat 34 1) (= 34/1), and the four
numeric witnesses are the values obs0 val ... obs3 val that the kernel already bound when the lifts fired. The second
refine threads the four Evidence Verified witnesses through the right-associated PProd chain. native decide closes
the residual PLift goal: the kernel evaluates 34.asRat = (17 + 19) −(2 + 0) to True.
Trust composition.
The kernel-minted output for this claim depends on: (i) the four runtime Attested T payloads (one
per tool call) — and only those (Theorem 3.1); (ii) the per-source stats sum strict lift, audited once for this table; (iii)
the kernel’s native arithmetic check for the PLift = 34 identity. The Sigma witness “34” surfaces as the certified surface
answer; the generated Lean file is the replay artifact (any auditor holding the kernel + lifts + tool adapter can re-typecheck
without re-running the LLM). This is the single complex example we use in Sections 3 and 4 to demonstrate that the
architecture scales beyond single-shot lookups: composition over multiple lifts preserves the kernel’s mint discipline and, by
construction, the verified-output guarantee.
P. Full proofs of the safety theorems
This appendix provides the full proofs deferred from Section 3.6. Notation follows the main text: given a VERIFIED run
of RUNTIMEVERIFY(s, c) returning the proof object (leanFile, evidence, steps), we write proof for the term bound by
claim proof inside leanFile (or claim refutation for refuted claims), A(leanFile) for the set of axioms declared in lean-
File, and deps(proof) ⊆A(leanFile) for the dependency closure of proof as reported by #print axioms claim proof.
P.1. Operational whitelist predicate and guarantee boundaries
Whitelist-compliant module.
Let leanFile be the module text returned by a run, let proof be the term bound by
claim proof (or claim refutation for refuted claims), and let deps(proof) denote its dependency closure as re-
ported by #print axioms claim proof. We say leanFile is whitelist-compliant for source s iff every element of
deps(proof) lies in one of four buckets: B1 the fixed EG-VAR prelude (committed at the repository hash in Sec-
tion G); B2 the standard Lean 4 core axioms (Classical.choice, Quot.sound, propext); B3 runtime-emitted ob-
servation leaves (obsN q,p,att,tag,shape,l1,row,cell,id,max,min; csN q,att; tableTool/statsTool); B4
per-source lifts whose names match lift [0-9a-f]+ .+ drawn from Λ(s). Additionally, deps(proof) must contain no
sorry/sorryAx/Lean.Axiom.sorry and must contain a trust-artifact witness: either mkVerified (attestation path), or at
least one B3 observation-leaf together with at least one B4 per-source lift (direct-evidence lift path, per Section 3.2). The
standalone script verify axioms.py evaluates this predicate mechanically on leanFile.
Generation-time gate versus replay gate.
The kernel call inside run pipeline (lake env lean) is the primary
safety gate: a claim is emitted as VERIFIED only if the kernel returns a zero exit status on leanFile. The replay audit
verify axioms.py is a standalone artifact-level check: it accepts leanFile as input, invokes the Lean elaborator on its
#print axioms directive, and enforces the whitelist predicate on the reported dependency closure. Any third party
holding leanFile and the Lean toolchain can re-run python -m runtime.verify axioms without invoking any LLM role,
reproducing the audit decision. The orchestrator (src/python/runtime/orchestrator.py) chains the two: a claim is
published as VERIFIED only if both calls succeed.
What the theorems do and do not guarantee.
Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 guarantee that every VERIFIED output descends
from a real tool call and every accepted proof step is type-correct. They do not guarantee: (i) that goalType is a semantically
faithful rendering of the natural-language claim — this is the formalizer’s responsibility, evaluated separately by the
answer-match axis (Section 5.1(i, iii)); (ii) that the per-source lifts Λ(s) correctly interpret the tool’s L1 outputs as L2
world facts — a semantically wrong but audited lift can still certify a wrong formalized claim (Section 5.1(ii)). Both are
honest trust-artifact boundaries, not architectural oversights: Λ(s) is LLM-assisted, curator-reviewed, and frozen per commit
(Section 3.6). World-inconsistency containment follows from the WProp ̸→Prop phase separation in the current Lean
encoding; we treat it as implementation detail, not as a main-text theorem (see Section 5.1).
P.2. Lemma chain for the theorems
Lemma P.1 (Checker fidelity). If KERNELCHECK(leanFile) returns (True, output), then proof satisfies proof : goalType in
Lean 4’s dependent type theory relative to A(leanFile).
32

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
Proof. The procedure KERNELCHECK(leanFile) is implemented at pipeline.py:4428 by invoking lake env lean on
leanFile and inspecting the elaborator’s exit status and output. The Lean 4 kernel is a type-checker for the Calculus of
Inductive Constructions: a closed expression t elaborates at type T iff the kernel applies a finite sequence of typing-rule
applications that witness t : T starting from the declared axioms and definitions of the environment (de Moura & Ullrich,
2021). The kernel rejects any term that invokes an undeclared identifier, applies a constructor at a non-matching type index,
or whose strict positivity or termination constraints are violated. The declared axiom set used during elaboration is exactly
the union of (a) axioms from imported modules (the EG-VAR prelude loaded via the import preamble at the top of leanFile)
and (b) axioms introduced by top-level axiom declarations in leanFile itself; call this union A. If the elaborator reports
success, then by the kernel’s type-correctness invariant the stored proof term proof satisfies proof : goalType under A.
Lemma P.2 (Runtime emission discipline). Every observation-leaf axiom declaration in leanFile — every top-level
axiom declaration whose name matches one of the B3 schemas — was emitted by the runtime only after a successful call
EXECUTE(t, q) whose resulting triple (t, q, payload) was appended to evidence before the corresponding emission step.
The two tool-identifier axioms tableTool and statsTool are declared once in the module preamble as pure identifiers of
the ToolId sort and carry no payload content.
Proof. We prove the claim by exhaustive inspection of the module-emission path in src/python/runtime/pipeline.py.
The text of leanFile is assembled by the function build lean file (pipeline.py:3174–3488); no other code path emits
module text. We enumerate the branches of build lean file at which an axiom line is appended to the module.
site (file:line)
source
axiom families emitted
3203–3204
preamble
tableTool, statsTool
3231–3232
common-sense
csN q, csN att
3272–3275
stats (argmax/argmin)
obsN row, obsN max, obsN cell
3318
stats (value-only L1)
obsN l1
3352
stats (topk-by L1)
obsN l1
3387
stats (topk/bottomk)
obsN l1
3399–3404
stats (legacy shape)
obsN q,p,att,tag,shape
3431–3434
table (cell-lookup)
obsN row, obsN cell, obsN id
3442–3447
table (cell-lookup legacy)
obsN q,p,att,tag,shape
Table 9. Axiom-emission sites inside build lean file. Each obsN * or csN * branch executes only if the preceding loop variable
carries a well-formed payload, which is appended to evidence by the runtime tool-dispatch layer before build lean file is invoked.
The preamble row declares tableTool/statsTool once per module as pure ToolId identifiers.
Each stats and table row lives inside a branch guarded by an evidence entry whose source field is "stats", "table",
or "common sense". The tool-dispatch layer and the runtime solver loop in run pipeline append an entry to evidence
only after a successful EXECUTE(t, q) call returns a well-formed payload; failed or rejected calls return None and produce
no evidence entry. Therefore, at the point build lean file emits any observation-leaf axiom for evidence index i, the
corresponding triple (t, q, payload) is already present at position i of evidence.
A grep over pipeline.py for "axiom obs", "axiom cs", "axiom tableTool", and "axiom statsTool" recovers
exactly the lines listed in Table 9 (together with solver-prompt skeleton lines at pipeline.py:2943--3080 that build
the prompt string shown to the LLM solver but do not append to leanFile). The prompt-skeleton sites are outside
build lean file and do not contribute to the module text.
Lemma P.3 (Reserved names in per-source lifts). For leanFile to be whitelist-compliant, every top-level declaration in Λ(s)
must have a name matching the regex lift [0-9a-f]+ .+. In particular, per-source lift names must not collide with the
identifiers claim proof, claim refutation, tableTool, statsTool, or any of the schemas obsN * / csN *.
Proof. Whitelist compliance places each axiom in deps(proof) into exactly one of B1–B4. B1 and B2 are disjoint from
the lift-name regex: the prelude declarations are named after the EG-VAR vocabulary in src/lean/EGVar/*.lean, and
the three Lean core axioms are fixed names. The runtime-emitted schemas B3 have forms obsN *, csN *, tableTool,
statsTool that the regex lift [0-9a-f]+ .+ does not match. A per-source lift whose name collided with a reserved
identifier would either (a) shadow a prelude declaration, causing elaboration failure at lake env lean invocation (rejected
by Theorem P.1); (b) match a B3 regex, causing verify axioms.py to classify the axiom in the wrong bucket (a curation-
audit failure the regex-conforming prefix rules out); or (c) collide with claim proof / claim refutation, triggering a
33

Evidence-Grounded Verified Agentic Reasoning
declaration-name clash at elaboration time. The enforced lift <sourceHash> <suffix> prefix mechanically excludes
all three.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. We proceed in three steps.
Step 1: the proof type-checks under the declared axiom set. The verdict VERIFIED is produced at Algorithm 1, line 17, only
if KERNELCHECK(leanFile) returned (True, output) on line 15. By Theorem P.1, this implies proof : goalType in Lean 4’s
type theory under A(leanFile), and in particular deps(proof) ⊆A(leanFile).
Step 2:
the closure is restricted to the whitelist buckets.
Whitelist compliance of leanFile (the theo-
rem’s hypothesis) is the predicate that every element of deps(proof) lies in one of the buckets B1–B4, con-
tains no sorry/sorryAx/Lean.Axiom.sorry, and contains a trust-artifact witness.
The implementation at
src/python/runtime/verify axioms.py parses the #print axioms output and enforces each clause directly; Theo-
rem P.3 makes the bucketing unambiguous.
Step 3:
observation-leaf axioms in the closure are evidence-backed.
Partition deps(proof) into four subsets
DB1, DB2, DB3, DB4 by bucket. Step 2 covers the closure.
For every ω ∈DB3: the axiom ω was declared in leanFile by one of the emission sites tabulated in Table 9. By Theorem P.2,
the emission was preceded in time by the runtime appending a corresponding triple to evidence (for obsN */csN * axioms);
the two ToolId axioms tableTool and statsTool are explicitly admitted without an evidence entry because they carry
no payload. Hence every observation-leaf axiom in DB3 ∩deps(proof) is backed by an entry of evidence.
For DB1, each axiom is declared in one of the fixed EG-VAR prelude files (EGVar/Basic.lean, EGVar/TableL1.lean,
EGVar/WorldOntology.lean, EGVar/Tactics.lean), committed at the repository hash reported in Section G.
For DB2, each axiom is one of Classical.choice, Quot.sound, or propext from Lean 4’s core library.
For DB4, each axiom has a name matching lift [0-9a-f]+ .+ with hex prefix equal to the MD5 of s; the whitelist
predicate enforces this regex, and the full set of such axioms is committed to data/tier1 table formalizations.json
at the reported commit hash.
Combining steps 1–3, any ω ∈deps(proof) is either (a) a prelude axiom from DB1, (b) a standard Lean core axiom from
DB2, (c) a runtime-emitted observation-leaf backed by a prior tool execution in evidence, or (d) an audited per-source lift
from Λ(s).
Proof of Theorem 3.2. An “accepted inference step” is, by the definition of the runtime’s VERIFIED verdict (Algorithm 1,
line 17), one that appears in the term proof returned by KERNELCHECK(leanFile) with accepted = True. By Theorem P.1,
proof type-checks under the axiom set declared in leanFile. The kernel’s type-correctness invariant requires that proof is
constructed by a finite, typing-rule-compliant sequence of inference steps leading to proof : goalType; consequently every
such inference step is valid in Lean 4’s dependent type theory relative to the declared axioms.
34
